                   Language museums
                      of the world
                                Edited by Ottar Grepstad




omslag language museum.indd 1                              08.03.2018 16:11:26
omslag language museum.indd 2   08.03.2018 16:11:26
Language museums
   of the world
   Institutions, websites, memorials




       Edited by Ottar Grepstad



Centre for Norwegian Language and Literature
                 Ørsta 2018
© 2018 Ottar Grepstad and Centre for Norwegian Language and Literature

Last update 19 March 2018
Published at www.aasentunet.no 19 March 2018

Front page
Inscription in 34 languages on a glass wall in the Ivar Aasen Centre, Ørsta, Norway (photo Ivar Aasen Centre).
An inaccurate transcription of the texts:
1        Fulfulde (woodi ujuneeje bolle)
1–2      English (there are thousands of languages)
2        Estonian (maailmas on tuhandeid keeli)
3        Mandarin (shiejie shang you shuqianzhong yuyan)
         Irish Gaelic (tá mílte teanga ánn)
4        Italian (di lingue ce ne sono a migliaia)
4–5      Portuguese (há milhares de línguas)
5        Noregian Nynorsk (det finst tusenvis av sprsk)
5–6      Polish (jest kilka tysiecy jezyków)
6        Arabic (hunaak aalaaf allughaat)
7        Latin (linguarum sunt milia complura)
7–8      Bosnian, Croatian, Serbian (na svijetu ima nekoliko tisuca)
8–9      Spanish (hay millares de lenguas)
9        Shona (kune zviuru nezviuru zvemitauro)
10       Bulgarian (ima njakolko hiljadi ezika)
10–11 Turkic (binlerce dil vardir)
11       Finnish (kielis on useita tuhansia)
11–12 Icelandic (þađ eru til mörg þusund tungumál)
12       Armenian
13       Hindi (hazaaron bhaashaaen hain)
         Welsh (y mae miloedd o ieithoedd)
14       Russian (susjtsjestvujet neskol'ko tysiatsj jazykov)
14–15 French (il existe des milliers de langues)
15       Urdu (hazaaron zabaanen hain)
16       German (es gibt mehrere tausend sprachen)
16–17 Afrikaans (daar is duisende tale)
17       Hebrew (yesh kama alfe lshonot)
17–18 Catalan (hi ha milers de llengues)
18       Bahasa Indonesia (ada beribu-ribu bahasa)
19       Classic Greek (glsttsn eisi khiliades pollai)
19–20 Dutch (er zijn duizenden talen)
20       Ndebele (kule zinkulungwane ezinengi zendimi)

Title page
Museu da Língua Portuguesa, Sao Paolo, Brazil (photo Dreamstime.com)

Contact
admin@aasentunet.no
Centre for Norwegian Language and Literature, N-6160 Hovdebygda, Norway
Phone +47 70 04 75 70

ISBN 978-82-92602-25-6




                                                      2
Contents
Foreword and acknowledgements                                        5

Museums of language and languages of the world                       9
Grimmwelt (2015), Germany                                           11
Linguistic Educational Museum (1992), Ukraine                       12
Mundolingua (2013), France                                          13
Museum der Sprachen der Welt (2013), Germany                        14
National Museum of Language (2008), USA                             15
Taalmuseum (2016), Netherlands                                      16

Museums of one language or group of languages                       17
Afrikaans Language Museum and Monument (1975), South Africa         19
Alutiiq Museum (1995), USA                                          20
Ateneo de Lengua y Cultura Guaraní (1985), Paraguay                 21
Baile nan Gàidheal / Highland Village (1962), Canada                22
Basque Museum and Cultural Center (1985), USA                       23
Canadian Language Museum (2011), Canada                             24
Cultúrlann McAdam Ó Fiaich (1991), Northern Ireland                 25
Dante Alighieri Society (2011), Italy                               26
Erlebniswelt Deutsche Sprache (2013), Germany                       27
Esperanto Museum of the Austrian National Library (1927), Austria   28
Esperanto Museum (2008), Czech Republic                             29
Esperanto Museum (2013), China                                      30
Great Blasket Centre (1993), Ireland                                31
Hungarian Language Museum (2008), Hungary                           32
Ivar Aasen Centre (1898), Norway                                    33
Language Movement Museum (2010), Bangladesh                         34
Musée national de l’espéranto de Gray (1977), France                35
Museo de Esperanto de Subirats (1968), Spain                        36
Museo de la Lengua (2012), Argentina                                37
Museo de la Tierra Guaraní (1978), Paraguay                         38
Museo del Dialetto dell'Alto Lario Occidentale (2007), Italy        39
Museo della Lingua Greco-Calabra “Gerhard Rohlfs” (2016), Italy     40
Museu da Língua Portuguesa (2006), Brazil                           41
Museum Ladin Ćiastel de Tor (2001), Italy                           42
Museum of the Basque language (2004), Spain                         43
Museum of the Lithuanian language (2006), Lithuania                 44
Nüshu Museum (2004), China                                          45
Sòn de Lenga Museum (1999), Italy                                   46
Sprachpanorama (2017), Switzerland                                  47
SprachRaum (2010), Germany                                          48
wortreich (2011), Germany                                           49
Yazi Tarihi Müzesi (2003), Kazakhstan                               50
Yugambeh Museum (1995), Australia                                   51

Museums of writing and written culture                              53
China Book Culture Exhibition Hall (2008), China                    55
Deutsches Buch- und Schriftmuseum (1884), Germany                   56
Gutenberg Museum (1901), Germany                                    57
JAARS Museum of the Alphabet (1961), USA                            58


                                                    3
Klingspor-Museum Offenbach (1953), Germany                           59
Musée Champollion (2007), France                                     60
Museo del Libro y de la Lengua (2011), Argentina                     61
Museum für Kommunikation (1898), Germany                             62
Museum für Kommunikation (1907), Switzerland                         63
Museum of Writing (1999), England                                    64
National Hangeul Museum (2014), Korea                                65
National Museum of Chinese Writing (2009), China                     66
Sydney Museum of Words (2013), Australia                             67
The Word (2016), England                                             68
Verbum – Casa das Palabras (2003), Spain                             69

Museums in memory of persons                                         71
Daniel Sanders Haus (2011), Germany                                  73
Dr. Johnson’s House (1911), England                                  74
House Museum of Neofit Rilski (1981), Bulgaria                       75
Ján Kollár Museum (1983), Slovakia                                   76
Konrad-Duden-Museum (1999), Germany                                  77
Ljudevit Gaj Museum (1966), Croatia                                  78
Ľudovít Štúr Museum (1965), Slovakia                                 79
Museum of Vuk and Dositej (1949), Serbia                             80
Native House of Ľudovít Štúr and Alexander Dubček (1965), Slovakia   81
Noah Webster House (1966), USA                                       82
Primož Trubar House (1986), Slovenia                                 83

Digital museums and information                                      85
Diguital museums                                                     87
Websites                                                             90
International institutions and networks                              95

Plans and projects for new museums                                   99
English Language Museum, England                                     101
Eurotales, Italy                                                     101
Lingman, Language Museum, China                                      102
National Museum of the Hebrew Language, Israel                       102
National Museum of World Writing, Korea                              103
Planet Word, USA                                                     103
Sprach Lust, Austria                                                 104
Vigdís International Centre of Multilingualism, Iceland              105

Beginnings and endings                                               107
Initiatives for new museums                                          109
Museums closed                                                       111
Projects halted                                                      112

International network of language museums                            113

Events and places of memory and celebration                          117
Years, days and weeks                                                119
A selection of festivals                                             121
Language monuments by country                                        124

Indexes                                                              127
Museums by country and by year                                       129


                                                      4
Preface

Two out of three of all the languages in the world are used in Africa or Asia. In this book,
however, two out of three language museums are situated in Europe. That indicates differences
in the institutional development of societies, but also some of the difficulties connected to such
documentation.
        In some way or another, language has been in the world as long as there have been
human beings. Museums dealing with language are among the newer institutions in the world
of museums. The way of thinking about language has changed throughout the world the last
decades, and almost half of all language musums listed below, was opened after year 2000. But
language in a broader sense, meaning writing and written culture, has been an important
subject for many museums for more than a hundred years. The oldest language museum dates
from 1898, and the oldest museum on written culture from 1884.
        In this context, a language museum is a museum devoted to information, education,
documentation and/or research about language of some kind or another. Language is a cultural,
social or political issue as well as a linguistic one, and in this broader sense, language museums
also include institutions that deal with written or spoken culture as their core theme.
        The hunt for language museums started in 2008. A preliminary catalogue was published
in 2009, Museums of language and written culture in the world. By then, 22 museums were
identified, and 12 institutions were under construction, out of which only three existed in 2017.
        The work was to be continued, and in February 2015, 58 language museums were
presented in A world of languages and written culture. Several hundred websites had been visited
to find museums and collect relevant information. Some museums also contributed with
information about other museums. All the diplomatic stations in Norway were asked for help,
and they broadened the picture even more. A number of national ICOM committees were
asked for help to get hold of possible lacks. Renewed systematic search in various Internet
browsers brought some more institutions into light, and latest news about institutions under
construction confirmed the picture.
        Many museums of archaeology or history contain sections or even whole departments
of exhibitions about language and written culture, for instance the British Museum in London,
National Museum of Ethnology in Osaka, and the many Smithsonian museums in the USA.
Language and written culture is, however, not a main focus of their field of work. The
boundary between a museum of writing and a museum of literature is anything but sharp.
Literary museums seldom discuss language matters, but neverthelss, a few museums of culture
that emphasizes language have been included as a reminder of the fact that any language is a
cultural issue, and an essential one.
        Some museums of written culture deal with the history of books as a history of
technology and thus place themselves in the group of museums of communication. Musée de
l'imprimerie de Lyon in France and all other museums of printing, paper mills and so on are
also on the fringes of written culture. Museum für Kommunikation in Bern, Switzerland, is
more concerned about the history of written culture. Centres of literacy easily become a part of
the education system and usually present no documentation of the language situation in the
world or in a country.
        Many museums deal with individuals or are connected to the history or collection of
persons. There is nothing strange about that: language is made by people, by persons. Every

                                                5
single language is the outcome of the work of people – many or few, but for a long time. So
after all, the museums of language are another chapter in the history of mankind.
        This second edition includes 80 museums of language and written culture in 31
countries. There might be more, and in some cases, updated information has been hard to find.
The museums have been divided into five groups:
• 6 museums of language and languages of the world
• 33 museums of a single language or group of languages
• 15 museums of writing and written culture
• 11 museums in memory of persons
• 15 digital museums
        By 2017, there were ideas, plans and initiatives for at least 18 more language museums,
some of them even under construction, but six museums had been closed.
        The book presents 39 websites about language systems, language in use and language
rights. Documentation is also included about 35 monuments, 23 festivals and 69 days and
weeks for memory or celebration of languages.
        The first edition was the background for inviting museums to establish an International
network of language museums. By January 2018, 14 museums had joined the network after an
inaugural meeting in Milan in July 2016. The platform is included at page 100.
        Most of the texts, as most of the photos, have been edited from the websites of the
museums, sometimes supplied with articles and presentations from news media. Some
museums have also contributed with texts written for this edition.
        Corrections, updates and supplements are welcome to admin@aasentunet.no.



Norway, 8 March 2018



Ottar Grepstad
General Director
Centre for Norwegian Language and Literature




                                               6
Acknowledgements

Over the years, several people gave advices and answered my repeating questions. Dorit Lehrer
helped to organize the museums in a proper way, Margaret Sonmez in Ankara made a major
effort to find even more museums, and Elaine Gold in Toronto and Mark Oremland in Paris
joined the first board of Internaitonal network of language museums.
        Colleagues around the world were eager to send updated information and corrections:
Anvita Abbi (Padma Shri), Simon Fraser University, Vancouver
Florence Aggeler, Sprachpanorama, Laufenburg
Marilyn Ahrens, Museum of the Alphabet, Waxhaw
Dan Aizpitarte, Basque Museum, Boise
Marcus Barrett, The English Project, Winchester
Wendy Bennett, University of Cambridge
Nadia Cannata, Sapienza University of Rome
Rodney Chaisson / Ruairidh Sèason, Baile nan Gàidheal / Highland Village, Iona / Rubha
Shaun Davies, Yugambeh Museum Language and Heritage Research Centre, Beenleigh
Maia Gahtan, Istituto Lorenzo de’ Medici, Florence
Elaine Gold, Canadian Language Museum, Toronto
Klaas van der Hoek, University of Amsterdam
Helga Horschig, Klingspor Museum, Offenbach am Main
Amy Hunter, Initiative für ein Museum der Sprachen der Welt, Berlin
Michael Jonas, Die Afrikaanse Taalmuseum en Monument, Paarl
Barbara Jouves, Musee des lettres et manuscrits, Paris
Andrea Kirchner, wortreich, Bad Hersfeld
Stéphanie Lebreton, Musée Champollion, Figeac
Dorit Lehrer, The Academy of the Hebrew Language, Jerusalem
Liu, Hsing-Yi, National Taiwan Museum, Taiwan
Nicolas Lodge, The English Project, Winchester
Celine Luppo McDaid, Dr Johnson’s House, London
Beáta Mihalkovičová, Múzeum Ľudovíta Štúra, Modra
Katharina Moling, Museum Ladin, St. Martin in Thurn
Amaia Ocerin, Euskararen Etxea, Bilbao
David Galeano Olivera, Ateneo de Lengua y Cultura Guaraní, Fernando de la Mora
Mark Oremland, Mundolingua, Paris
Rosella Pellerino, Espaci Occitan, Dronero
Nyiri Péter, Hungarian Language Museum, Széphalom
Manfred Pfaus, SprachRaum, Buchen (Odenwald)
Lucilla Pizzoli, Società Dante Alighieri, Florence
Jill Robbins, National Museum of Language, Maryland
Hannelore Schneiderheinze, Deutsches Buch- und Schriftmuseum, Leipzig
Uta Seewald-Heeg, Neue Fruchtbringende Gesellschaft, Köthen
Pepijn Reeser, Taalmuseum, Leiden
Stephen J. Smith, Callaghan, Australia
Margaret Sonmez, Middle East Technical University, Ankara
Marina Toledo, Museu da Língua Portuguesa, São Paulo

                                              7
Bernhard Tuider, Esperanto Museum, Vienna
Kostiantyn Tyschenko, Shevchenko National University of Kyiv
Jolanta Zabarskaite, Institute of the Lithuanian Language, Vilnius
Lijie Zhuo, China
Jiyeon Yang, Korea
        To all of you: you made this possible! I also wish to thank the embassies to Norway of
Austria, Chile, Croatia, Denmark, Mexico, Paraguay, Switzerland, Ukraine and USA for
worthful help, as well as the European Union Delegation to Norway.




                                               8
                             Museums
of language and languages of the world




             9
10
Grimmwelt (2015), Germany
Kassel, Germany

www.grimms.de/museum
grimmnet@t-online.de
Weinbergstraße 21, 34117 Kassel
Phone +49 561 598 61 910



Die GRIMMWELT Kassel will das schöpferische Leben und Wirken der Brüder Grimm einem
breiten Publikum zugänglich machen. Sie stellt dazu die lebendige Vermittlung von Sprache
und Literatur in den Mittelpunkt. Das Publikum soll motiviert werden, sich Wissensinhalte
aktiv zu erschließen und positive Lernerlebnisse zu sammeln.
       Die GRIMMWELT Kassel arbeitet mit hervorragenden Künstlern, mit Kunst- und
Medienvermittlern sowie mit kulturellen und sozialen Einrichtungen zusammen. Neben
wertvollen Originalen sorgen Ton und Film, multimediale und interaktive Angebote sowie die
künstlerischen Installationen für anregende Erfahrungen.
       Die GRIMMWELT Kassel schlägt Brücken zwischen Kultur und Literatur in die Welt
des Publikums. Die erlebnisorientierte Vermittlung lädt dazu ein, eigene Lösungswege und
Ausdrucksmöglichkeiten zu finden, Trends und Veränderungen wahrzunehmen,
Entwicklungen zu verstehen und einzuordnen.
       Die GRIMMWELT Kassel wurde am 4. September 2015 eröffnet. Die Nutzfläche ist ca.
4000 qm, die Ausstellungsfläche 1.600 qm, und die Gesamtkosten für Bau und Einrichtung
belaufen sich auf etwa 20 Millionen Euro.




                                            11
Linguistic Educational Museum (1992), Ukraine
Kyiv, Ukraine

http://www.univ.kiev.ua/en/departments/ucfl
lingmus@ukr.net
Linguistic Educational Museum, University of Kyiv, 64 Volodymyrs'ka St., UA-01033 Kyiv
Phone +38 44 239 31 82

The university professor and polyglot Kostiantyn Tyschenko was the founder of this first and
only linguistic educational museum in the world in 1992 at Shevchenko National University of
Kyiv. In the 1960s, the first sound library of language recordings was organized, later
transformed into new media and expanded. In 1978, the first major exhibition of students' and
teachers' graphic works on linguistic topics was opened. A stationary location for exhibitions
and sound library was established from 1992. The museum conducts training, excursion and
advisory work with a steady stream of new exhibitions.
        The museum is organized in such a way that its exhibits reflect the knowledge of the
languages of the world as well as the new scientific achievements in linguistics. The whole is
systematized on a single metatheoretical basis, elaborated by Tyschenko in his book Metatheory
of Linguistics (Метатеорія мовознавства, 1992, 2000). The main exhibition deals with seven
fields of linguistic knowledge: languages of the world, dialects, idiolects, texts, words, origin of
language and evolution of language. One of three halls of the museum is reserved for an
exhibition on language contacts. A long frieze exhibits a 70-meter strip of the Gallery of world
languages. Here, the visitors can get acquainted with samples of verbal communication in more
than a hundred languages and hear and see texts in languages common and rare.
        On view are the genetic predecessors of the modern writing; the ideographic systems (of
China and ancient Assyria), consonant writings (of the Semitic peoples), alphabetical writings
(of the Greeks, the Armenians, the Georgians). There are also samples of secondary types of
graphic language expression. The museum presents Tyschenko’s metatheory of linguistics as
well as some of his new methods of linguistic investigation, e.g. for evaluating lexical distances
between languages, for area contextualization in toponymics and others.


                                                 12
Mundolingua (2013), France
Paris, France

www.mundolingua.org
contact@mundolingua.org
10 rue Servandoni, F-75 006 Paris
Phone +33 1 56 81 65 79



Language is one of the fundamental abilities that make us human. It has played a key role in
the evolution of people and modern society. In the heart of the Latin Quarter, between the
Luxembourg Gardens and Saint Sulpice, Mundolingua invites you on a most unusual journey,
in a fun and cozy setting, to discover this phenomenon.
        Covering nearly 170 m², the permanent exhibition explores many different themes,
divided into 4 main areas:
• Language – the bricks common to all languages, such as sounds, meaning and grammar
• Learning – be it one’s mother tongue or a foreign language, and problems that can arise
• Languages: the massive variety, families, writing, dialects, social factors …
• Playing with language including lies, invented languages, slang and codes, amongst others
        Key objects include a life size model of the Rosetta Stone, a facsimile of the Gutenberg
Bible, a Chinese typewriter, a large head showing where we make consonants, a facsimile of the
7m Isaiah Dead Sea Scroll and a real Enigma Machine in the codes section.
        There are about 40 interactive touchscreens, and the content is in the 6 languages of the
UN: Arabic, English, Spanish, French, Mandarin and Russian. Each screen is surrounded by
objects pertinent to the subject of the alcove, and people can choose how deep they want to go
into each subject. Headphones enable visitors to listen to recordings, the languages quiz and
videos in the different alcoves. Between the ground floor and the basement there is a micro-
cinema with about 50 DVDs, half of them big cinema features connected in some way with
language, and the other half subject specific documentaries. One can spend anywhere between
an hour and 2 days enjoying the interactive exhibits.
        Our space celebrates the variety and diversity of human language, so although the
information is available in 6 languages, no one particular language is favoured.




                                               13
Museum der Sprachen der Welt (2013), Germany
Berlin, Germany

www.linguaemundi.info
info@linguaemundi.info
“Initiative für ein Museum der Sprachen der Welt e.V.”, Schwedenstr. 15 A, D-13357 Berlin
Phone +49 30 436 32 97

The aim is to set up a permanent museum that reflects daily life in multilingual and
multicultural Berlin. In a city where more than one in three schoolchildren is growing up
bilingually, this initiative wants to explore how language use informs the local and regional
identities of new and lifelong Berliners, as well as the city’s temporary visitors. The museum
will provide an engaging forum for dialogue on key aspects of a complex social phenomenon:
debates around communication technology, language learning, Anglicisms and notions of
purity, ways of expressing gender and identity; how language influences perception; how it can
be a tool of inclusion or exclusion; how changes in usage can trigger fears of being left behind.
        Germany has several museums celebrating the history of the German language, its
literary heroes and long tradition of book-printing and the written word. While understanding
the past helps to define the future, this is an unconventional museum in that the main focus is
on critically examining language use in the present day. Addressing this ever-shifting and
intangible subject-matter poses a creative challenge. They aim to create exhibits that the visitors
themselves can contribute to, engaging in dialogue and open-ended learning outcomes.
        The Initiative is a small group of language enthusiasts from a range of professional
backgrounds, from students to pensioners and everything in between. The initiative began in
2013 and became a registered association in 2016. Through the website and monthly “Salon der
Sprachen”, where guests meet to discuss a wide range of popular linguistic and niche topics,
they are building up a network of supporters for the long-term goal of establishing a permanent
museum. The ongoing search for funding, a location and a catchy name are further stepping
stones towards becoming a well-loved and indispensable institution devoted to language in the
heart of Berlin.


                                                14
National Museum of Language (2008), USA
www.languagemuseum.org
info@languagemuseum.org
Box 453 Greenbelt, MD 20768-0453, Maryland, USA
Phone +1 301 864 7071



The idea of establishing a national language museum in the national capital area began in 1971
among a group of expert linguists, language specialists, and language enthusiasts who were
intrigued by the potential of a museum dedicated exclusively to language. After decades of
feasibility studies, startup pains, and slow but steady incremental growth, the National
Museum of Language opened its doors in 2008 in College Park, Maryland, sustained by a
nearly all-volunteer governing board and roster of docents. The museum sought out and
collaborated with numerous national, regional and local organizations and supporters similarly
devoted to language education and appreciation. The museum's physical space in College Park
was closed in September 2014.
        The new National Museum of Language is a virtual, moveable, and outreach museum.
Exhibits from the physical museum are temporarily on loan to institutions, libraries, schools,
universities, and other public spaces. Online exhibits are being upgraded to provide an
interactive educational experience for students, teachers, and adults. The web-based museum
contains interactive exhibitions, and among its current on-line features are dialect research (A
Dictionary of American Regional English), an ancient Greek language collection of jokes, and a
series of interviews with prominent language experts.
        The Amelia C. Murdoch Speaker Series (named after the Museum founder) features
presentations on a variety of language-related topics, e.g., Esperanto and endangered
languages. For many years, the museum has supported an annual Summer Language Camp to
introduce school-aged children to languages and cultures – past languages have been Arabic,
Chinese, French and Spanish. In 2008, the museum commemorated UNESCO’s International
Year of Languages by sponsoring a contest to design an International Flag of Language, a
unique symbol representing by its shades of green past, present and future languages (above).


                                               15
Taalmuseum (2016), Netherlands
Leiden, Netherlands

http://taalmuseumleiden.nl/
info@taalmuseumleiden.nl
Stichting Taalmuseum Leiden, Leiden University Centre for Linguistics, Van Wijkplaats 4, NL-
2311 BX Leiden
Phone +31 71 527 2125

The Taalmuseum Leiden, an initiative from Leiden University, and supported by the
municipality of the City of Leiden, was officially launched on 19 September 2016 after a
preparatory phase of three years.
         The Taalmuseum Leiden is not a traditional museum. It does not have its own building.
It’s a project organisation that organises exhibitions and activities to connect (knowledge about)
language with audiences where these audiences already are: in the public space. The era of big
museum projects is over. Smaller-scale initiatives and durability are becoming more important,
also in the cultural sector. And not only that, the right place for language is at the heart of
society: the city as the stage for a museum.
         The aim of the Taalmuseum Leiden is to broaden people's interest in languages and to
show what role languages play in societies and cultures. The museum ties in with other
institutes and initiatives such as Leiden Global, in which Leiden museums participate, and
Leiden City of Knowledge, an initiative to promote Leiden as an innovative learning platform.
         The museum wants to communicate with as many people as possible. Its activities
therefore focus on a new way of visualisation of language and must be interesting to both
experts and the general public. The museum uses museum techniques such as exhibitions with
images, objects and text, but is also developing new technologies and combines these with
social media and more traditional forms of audience participation.


                                                16
                            Museums
of one language or group of languages




           17
18
Afrikaans Language Museum and Language Monument (1975),
South Africa
Die Afrikaanse Taalmuseum
Paarl, South Africa

www.taalmuseum.co.za
admin@taalmuseum.co.za
Gideon Malherbe House, Pastorielaan, ZA-Paarl 7621
Phone +27 21 872 3441



The Afrikaans language is one of the youngest languages compared to other languages of the
world. It is a unique language, because its roots are spread over three continents, Europe, Africa
and Asia, and it has mother tongue speakers across the boundaries of race, and culture.
        The idea of constructing a monument to the Afrikaans language was raised in 1942, and
by 1964 a competition was organised. Architect Jan van Wijk’s design was selected as the
winner, and The Afrikaans Language Monument was inaugurated in 1975. Three linked
columns symbolise the contribution of the Western world to Afrikaans, three rounded shapes
represent the contribution of Africa, and a wall for the contribution of the Malaysian people. A
pillar soaring 57 meters above a fountain represents the continuing growth of the language.
        The purpose of the Afrikaans Language Museum (inaugurated on 14 August 1975), is to
pay tribute to the people of the Association of True Afrikaners that was founded in this double
storey late Georgian house on the 14th of August 1875 for the purpose of advancing Afrikaans
as a written and spoken language. They played an important role in the formal recognition of
Afrikaans as an official language. Today it is also the purpose of the Museum to present various
aspects of the language, its development, its variants and its character in the modern context, so
that visitors can understand that it is indeed a living, growing language that is constantly
adapting itself to the modern world.


                                               19
Alutiiq Museum (1995), USA
Kodiak, Alaska, USA

http://alutiiqmuseum.org/
info@alutiiqmuseum.org
215 Mission Road, First Floor, Kodiak, AK 99615 Alaska, USA
Phone +1 907 486 7004



The Alutiiq Museum grew from the Kodiak Area Native Association’s (KANA) Culture and
Heritage program. In 1987, the KANA Board of Directors resolved that the exploration and
celebration of Alutiiq heritage was essential to the health of Alutiiq people. They initiated a set
of heritage programs to promote awareness of Alutiiq history, language, and arts. In 1993
KANA received a $1.5 million grant from the Exxon Valdez Oil Spill Trustee Council to develop
a state-of-the-art repository and regional research facility. The Alutiiq Museum &
Archaeological Repository opened to the public in May 1995.
         The Alutiiq Museum provides tours of its exhibits, laboratory and collections storage
facilities to educational groups. All tours must be scheduled in advance and at the convenience
of the museum’s staff. Please contact us to schedule a group tour or to host your organization’s
next meeting in our gallery. Get started by downloading a copy of our tour request form.
         The Qik'rtarmiut Alutiit (Alutiiq People of the Island) language program documents
and revitalizes the Kodiak Alutiiq Language. Working together fluent Alutiiq speakers, Alutiiq
language learners, and linguists study Alutiiq, make recordings, create learning materials for all
ages, and teach the language to a new generation of speakers.




                                                20
Ateneo de Lengua y Cultura Guaraní (1985), Paraguay
Institute of Guaraní Language and Culture
Fernando de la Mora, Paraguay

www.ateneoguarani.edu.py/
davidgaleanoolivera@gmail.com
Julia Miranda Cueto 1721 e/ Ytororó y, R.I. 3 Corrales, PY-Fernando de la Mora, Paraguay
Phone +595 21 520 276



The Institute of Guaraní Language and Culture gathers researchers of Guaraní, as language and
as culture. Its activities include research, recovery, promotion, spreading, valuation, protection
and hierarchiization of the Guaraní language and culture, as well as the traditional Paraguayan
culture.
        True to it's educational and cultural values, this institution provides activities dedicated
to promoting activities such as lectures, conferences, festivals, contests, seminars and
conventions in order to strengthen and preserve the future of Guarani language.
        Among digital services related to the institute there is the blog Lenguaguarani
http://lenguaguarani.blogspot.no/.




                                                 21
Baile nan Gàidheal / Highland Village (1962), Canada
Iona, Canada

www.highlandvillage.ca
highlandvillage@novascotia.ca
Baile nan Gàidheal / Highland Village, 4119 Highway / Rathad 223, Iona / Rubha Eachainn, NS /
Alba Nuadh, B2C 1A3
Phone +1 902 725 2272 (1-866-442-3542)



The Baile nan Gàidheal / Highland Village is an outdoor living history museum that tells the
story of Gaelic settlement in Nova Scotia. It is a part of the Nova Scotia Museum family of
Museums and are operated by the Nova Scotia Highland Village Society. The museum is
located on a 43-acre property overlooking the majestic Bras d’Or Lakes in Iona, the heart of
central Cape Breton.
         The 11 historic buildings are staffed by costumed animators who are passionate about
sharing the Gaelic culture of their ancestors. The museum also hosts special events and
programs throughout the year.
         The vision of the Baile nan Gàidheal / Highland Village is to be internationally
acknowledged for advancing research, fostering appreciation, learning and sharing authentic
Gaelic language and heritage while serving a vibrant Gaelic cultural community.
         The mission is to research, collect, preserve and share the Gaelic heritage and culture of
Nova Scotia and represent it accurately and vibrantly.
         The museum is focused on growing Gaelic language and cultural interpretive
programming on site as well as working with the wider community to facilitate the
reconstruction of Gaelic language in Nova Scotia.
         Baile nan Gàidheal / Highland Village has 3000 artifacts in its collection that represent
the life of the Gael in Cape Breton. The library has over 900 books with subjects ranging from
Scottish and Cape Breton history, use of herbs, Mi’kmaq culture and information on care of
artifacts. Gaelic books are collected to support the language together with Gaelic songs, oral
history and stories to better interpret the Gaelic way of life in the museum.



                                                 22
Basque Museum and Cultural Center (1985), USA
Boise, Idaho, USA

www.basquemuseum.com
dan@basquemuseum.com
611 Grove St. in Downtown Boise, Idaho, USA
Phone +1 208 343 2671



The Mission of the Basque Museum and Cultural Center is to preserve, promote, and
perpetuate Basque history and culture. The only Basque language preschool outside of the
Basque Country, has been established as part of this mission.
         Boise, Idaho has long been a central location. Basque immigrants first here congregated
after coming to the United States from the Spanish Basque Region. As immigrants established
their lives here, Basques became well known for their hard work and perseverance.
         The institution provides a look into the Basque heritage through exhibits, collections,
and tours. As a cultural center, it's a gathering place for events and educational opportunities -
in which people of all backgrounds can participate in Basque activities.
         The museum was established in 1985 as a small museum in the historic Cyrus Jacobs-
Uberuaga House at 607 Grove Street. Now it provides a look into the heritage of the Basque
communities of Idaho and surrounding areas. Through hard work and the support of many
individuals, businesses, foundations, and Basque communities, the museum began to interpret
the history of the Basques, their origins, and their new life in America.
         The 611 Grove Street property became the primary facility for the museum's operations
in 1993. Over the years, thanks to many dedicated people, the museum has grown
tremendously in facilities and services and has become an Idaho cultural institution.
         The collections include oral history archives, a library, a collection of records & tapes,
manuscript materials, and numerous artifacts and photographs. It is the home of significant
resources for anyone interested in Basque history and culture.

                                                 23
Canadian Language Museum / Musée canadien des langues
(2011), Canada
Toronto, Canada

www.languagemuseum.ca
director@languagemuseum.ca
Canadian Language Museum, Glendon Gallery, Glendon College, 2275 Bayview Avenue,
Toronto ON M4N 3M6
Phone +1 647 785 1012



The Canadian Language Museum was established in 2011 to promote an appreciation of all of
the languages spoken in Canada. Few countries can match Canada’s rich and varied language
heritage, which includes over 60 Indigenous languages from coast to coast, the official
languages of French and English and their regional dialects, and the many languages brought
to this country by immigrants from around the world. The museum encourages dialogue on
language issues that are central to Canadian society, such as bilingualism, multilingualism, and
language endangerment, preservation and revitalization.
        The Canadian Language Museum’s exhibit space is located in Glendon Gallery on the
beautiful Glendon Campus of York University in Toronto. The museum creates and tours
bilingual (English/French) exhibits, including: “Canadian English, eh?”, “Le français au
Canada”, “Speaking the Inuit Way”, “Cree: The People’s Language”, “A Tapestry of Voices:
Celebrating Canada’s Languages” and “Read Between the Signs: 150 Years of Language in
Toronto”. These exhibits are shown in rotation in the gallery space and have toured across
Canada to universities, libraries, community centres and festivals.




                                               24
Cultúrlann McAdam Ó Fiaich (1991), Northern Ireland
Belfast, Northern Ireland

www.culturlann.ie
oifigfailte@culturlann.ie
Cultúrlann McAdam Ó Fiaich216 Falls Road, The Gaeltacht Quarter Belfast, BT12 6AH
Phone +353 028 9096 4180



An Chultúrlann on its three floors, contains space for artistic and theatrical expression, a café, a
tourist information office, book and gift shop. A new extension officially opened in September
2011 added a new gallery space and a space in which to interact with the language through
digital technology. The Cultúrlann is the jewel in the crown of Belfast’s emerging Gaeltacht
Quarter.
         Live traditional and contemporary music sessions, exhibitions, poetry readings, céilí’s,
concerts, workshops and the children’s arts programme are just some of the reasons why the
Chultúrlann is recognised as the Belfast Irish Experience. At Cultúrlann we celebrate our
cultural traditions and foster them through classes, workshops and performance.
         From small beginnings in 1991, when Cultúrlann first opened to accommodate a nine
pupil Irish-medium second level school, the centre has been the springboard for many Irish
language initiatives and enterprises that subsequently spread out around the area to create
what is now Belfast’s Gaeltacht Quarter.
         Today the centre produces a full programme of year round arts events and is also home
to Bia, the café at the heart of Cultúrlann, Oifig Fáilte tourist information point, the Siobhán
McKenna theatre, the Dillon Gallery, Na Ballaí Bána Gallery, An Ceathrú Póilí book/craftshop,
Raidió Fáilte, Aisling Ghéar theatre company, the design company; Dúch Dúchais, Taca who
support Irish medium education, The Irish Language culture and lifestyle magazine, Nós and
Tobar, a television production company.




                                                 25
Dante Alighieri Society (2011), Italy
Società Dante Alighieri
Florence and Rome, Italy

http://ladantefirenze.com                    http://ladante.it
info@firenze.ladante.it                      info@ladante.it
Via Gino Capponi, 4, 50121 Firenze           Piazza di Firenze, 27, 00186 Roma
Phone +39 055 2479014                        Phone +39 06 6873694



The Dante Alighieri Society promotes Italian culture and language around the world and is
present in more than 60 countries. It was formed in 1889 and is named after Dante
Alighieri (1265–1321), a pre-Renaissance poet from Florence and the author of La Divina
Commedia. Dante is considered the father of the Italian language.
         Many years ago, the Society announced plans to etstablish a Museo della lingua italiana
(Museum of Italian Language), to be inaugurated in 2011, which would mark the 150th
anniversary of the unification of Italy. Unfortunately, the project didn’t come ahead, but
instead, the society in 2011 produced an exhibition at Oblate Library in Florence, jointly with
the Accademia della Crusca and the Association for History of Italian Language. The exhibition
Una di lingua. La lingua italiana nell’Italia unita (One language. Italian language during united
Italy) is now available in Florence’s Committee of Dante Alighieri.
         In Palazzo Firenze in Rome, where Dante Alighieri Society has its main headquarter,
there is since 2014 a permanent exhibition on Italian language, titled Dove il sì suona with a verse
from Dante’s Commedia. The exhibition is composed of about 40 illustrated display panels. The
history of Italian language is described, mainly related with Italian literature, music, art and
cinema, even the relationship of Italian language with other European languages.

                                                26
Erlebniswelt Deutsche Sprache (2013), Germany
Köthen, Germany

www.erlebniswelt-deutsche-sprache.de/index.html
historisches-museum@bachstadt-koethen.de
Schloß Köthen, Schloßplatz 4, D-06366 Köthen (Anhalt)
Phone +49 3496 70099260



Die Erlebniswelt Deutsche Sprache ist Bestandteil des Historischen Museums Köthen. Sie
erweitert die Ausstellung zur Geschichte der Fruchtbringenden Gesellschaft.
        Die Erlebniswelt Deutsche Sprache wurde von der Neuen Fruchtbringenden
Gesellschaft eingerichtet. Im Schloss Köthen lädt die Ausstellung ein, ausgehend von der
Geschichte der ersten deutschen Sprachgesellschaft, der Fruchtbringenden Gesellschaft des 17.
Jahrhunderts, sowohl einen Blick in die Geschichte der deutschen Sprache zu werfen als auch
zahlreiche interessante Sprachphänomene zu erkunden.
        In der Erlebniswelt Deutsche Sprache können Besucher die deutsche Sprache entdecken
und sich über verschiedene Themen der deutschen Sprache informieren. Multimediale
Animationen, Projektionen und Tonwiedergabe laden Erwachsene und Kinder in der
Ausstellung zum Mitmachen ein.
        Die Erlebniswelt Deutsche Sprache möchte Interesse für die deutsche Sprache wecken.
Sie vermittelt Wissen über die deutsche Sprache, indem sie ihre Stellung in der Welt und ihre
Geschichte sichtbar macht.
        Die Erlebniswelt Deutsche Sprache:
• bietet einen Ort, an dem sich jeder, vor allem junge Menschen, mit der deutschen Sprache in
    vielfältiger Form auseinandersetzen kann,
• weckt die Freude an der deutschen Sprache,
• stärkt das Bewusstsein für den Wert und die Schönheit der deutschen Sprache,
• ermuntert den Einzelnen dazu, die deutsche Sprache zu pflegen.


                                             27
Esperanto Museum of the Austrian National Library (1927),
Austria
Vienna. Austria

www.onb.ac.at/museen/esperantomuseum
esperanto@onb.ac.at
Esperanto Museum of the Austrian National Library, Palais Mollard, Herrengasse 9, A-1010
Wien
Phone +43 1 534 10 730

The Esperanto Museum of the Austrian National Library was founded in 1927 by Hugo Steiner
as an association, then set up by contract in 1928 as a museum and technical library in the
Austrian National Library and opened in 1929 by a solemn government ceremony.
        After the annexation of Austria in 1938 by Hitler’s Germany the institution was closed,
and its book holdings were to be incorporated in a library of disapproved books planned for
Berlin. But since the books were the property of the National Library it was possible to stop
them from being transported.
        In 1947 there was a new opening in the Hofburg in the area of the Michaelerplatz. In
2005 the institution was presented with a wholly new look after its transfer into Palais Mollard.
For both the library, which had meanwhile grown to become the world’s biggest of its kind,
and for the museum items ideal holding conditions in secure and air-conditioned rooms had
been created.
        Since its founding by Hugo Steiner in 1927 the Esperanto Museum has had an extensive
library, to which the title Department of Planned Languages was given in 1990. It is also a
documentation site and archives, and a home to the world's biggest technical library on
interlinguistics, documenting some 500 planned languages. Subdivided by document type, the
library holds about 40,000 flyers, 35,000 printed volumes, 25,000 newspaper cuttings, 22,000
photographs, 10,000 handwritten texts and manuscripts, 3700 journals, 3000 museum artefacts,
1500 posters and 1200 sound recordings. In due time, large sections of the holdings may be
made available on the internet.


                                               28
Esperanto Museum (2008), Czech Republic
Svitavy, Czech Republic

www.muzeum.esperanto.cz
svitavy@esperanto.cz
Náměstí Míru 81/1, CZ-568 02 Svitavy
Phone +420 461 532 704 or 777 247 437



Esperanto Museum in Svitavy is a part of the city museum in Svitavy and presents the history
and current activity of the Esperanto movement. It was inaugurated in September 2008,
marking the 75th anniversary of Esperanto in Svitavy. Since 1996 Esperanto has been taught in
elementary schools as an optional subject.
        The museum can be found in the city’s most beautiful building, in the Ottendorfer
House, commissioned in 1892 by Svitavy born philanthropist Valentin Oswald Ottendorfer,
living at the time in USA. The house is also known as The Red Library, because its walls have a
red brick color.
        At the time, the city was mostly inhabited by German speakers. The public library
became the largest German-language library in Moravuia with 7,400 German books, which later
expanded into a collection of 22,000 volumes. The book collection was superb, since Ottendorfer
wanted to make good quality literature accessible to a wider public, and he hoped other cities
would follow his model.
        During World War II, many books were stolen, then more during the communist period,
until there were only 6,000 volumes left. Those are now conserved in the house across the plaza,
in the City museum of Svitavy.
        The story of Esperanto, as well as the language, is presented in a multimedia
information panel with touch-screens. The information includes Esperanto audibly, so visitors
can hear both spoken and sung examples of the language. The space for researchers is eauipped
with a comouter with constantly updated sources of data.
        From time to time, concerts, plays and lectures take place in the forum on the upper
floor.




                                              29
Esperanto Museum (2013), China
Zaozhuang, Shandong, China



China's first Esperanto museum has officially opened after more than two years of construction
to promote the "universal language."
         The Esperanto Museum, in Zaozhuang University in east China's Shandong province,
opened Saturday after hosting more than 7,000 visitors during a trial operation since May.
         With a display area covering 680 square meters, the museum is the largest of its kind in
Asia, said Sun Mingxiao, who is in charge of the facility.
         It boasts more than 26,000 items, including books, newspapers, photographs and
manuscripts. The majority of them were donated by Esperantonists from more than 40
countries or regions.
         Chen Haosu, head of the All-China Esperanto League, said the mission of the museum
is to record the history of Esperanto, promote the culture of the artificial language and its
development.
         The museum was jointly built by Zaozhuang University and the All-China Esperanto
League at a cost of 3 million yuan (US$ 490,000).
         Esperanto-related activities began in the university in the 1980s. Esperanto became an
optional course in the college in 2011, attracting more than 500 students so far.
         Up till now, about 400,000 Chinese have learned Esperanto, according to Sun.




                                               30
Great Blasket Centre (1993), Ireland
Ionad an Bhlascaoid Mhóir
Blasket Island, Ireland

www.blasket.ie
blascaod@opw.ie
The Great Blasket Centre, Dún Chaoin, Dingle, Co. Kerry, V92 TH73, Éire
Phone +353 66 9156444



The Blasket Centre on the mainland in Dún Chaoin on the tip of the Dingle Peninsula is a
fascinating heritage centre/museum honouring the unique community who lived on the remote
Blasket Islands until their evacuation in 1953.
         The Great Blasket Island, lying 5 km off the West Kerry coast, was inhabited
continuously for at least three hundred years. Because of its isolated location, the Blasket
community retained its own culture and tradition, at the heart of which lay their continuing use
of their native language of Irish (Gaelic). The Centre tells their story and celebrates their unique
literary achievements.
         The Blasket Centre tells the story of island life, subsistence fishing and farming,
traditional life including modes of work and transport, home life, housing and entertainment.
The Centre details the community’s struggle for existence, their language and culture, and the
extraordinary literary legacy they left behind- classics such as ‘The Islandman’, ‘Twenty Years
A-Growing’ and ‘Peig’. Their story is told using a variety of means - exhibitons, interactive
displays, artefacts, audio visual presentations and artworks.
         The Great Blasket Centre (Ionad an Bhlascaoid Mhóir), built in 1993 by the Office of
Public Works, honours the unique heritage of the Blasket Island and celebrates the native Irish
language.
         The Great Blasket Centre also functions as a cultural and community centre, hosting
artistic, dramatic, and musical events throughout the year. The renowned artists Liam O' Neill,
Tomaisín Ó Cíobháin, and Marie Simonds-Gooding, as well as many local artists and
photographers, have exibited their work in the Centre, and it has hosted concerts by famous
Irish acts such as Kila, Altan and Danú, and musicians Noel Hill, Tony MacMahon, Moya
Brennan and Hugh Tinney.


                                                 31
Hungarian Language Museum (2008), Hungary
A Magyar Nyelv Múzeuma
Széphalom, Hungary

www.nyelvmuzeum.net
info@nyelvmuzeum.hu
Hungarian Language Museum, H-3988 Sátoraljaújhely-Széphalom, Kazinczy utca 275., Borsod-
Abaúj-Zemplén megye
Phone +36 47 521 236

In Széphalom, just outside of Sátoraljaujhely, in the northeastern part of Hungary the Museum
of the Hungarian Language was opened in 2008. It can be found at the site of Ferenc Kazinczy’s
former fruit garden. Kazinczy is regarded “Father of the Modern Hungarian Language”, who at
the end of the 18th and beginning of the 19th century had an instrumental part in bringing the
Hungarian language into the modern times by reviving old words and creating new ones, to
enable it to keep up with scientific progress. Kazinczy lived in Széphalom for 25 years and now
his tomb can be found here. Széphalom is a national place of pilgrimage.
        The idea of creating this museum was launched by Dr. Emil Pásztor. His initiative was
adopted by the Kazinczy Ferenc Society which elaborated the thematic plan of the institution
and later erected the building. The Hungarian Language Museum is a department of the Petőfi
Museum of Literature in Budapest.
        The museum is not only a collection of books, scripts, letters and dictionaries, but also
has many exhibitions. The building contains three exhibition areas, a library, a room for
seminars and a lecture-hall with 100 seats. It is suitable for many kinds of events, like concerts,
cultural meetings and literary evenings. The museum has its own garden which is 5,4 hectares.
        The themes of the exhibitions include the history of the Hungarian language and
literature and dialects, the language of the present, writing, language games, language-
awareness and the responsibility of the language use, the Hungarian language, reform and the
life and work of Ferenc Kazinczy.

                                                32
Ivar Aasen Centre (1898), Norway
Ivar Aasen-tunet
Ørsta, Norway

www.aasentunet.no
admin@aasentunet.no
Ivar Aasen Centre, Indrehovdevegen 176, N-6160 Hovdebygda
Phone +47 70 04 75 70


The Ivar Aasen Centre in Western Norway is the oldest language museum in the world and the
only language museum in the Nordic countries in Europe.
        Ivar Aasen (1813–1896) was the man who changed the future of Norwegian language
history. As early as in 1836, only 22 years old, Aasen had a clear opinion on how the Norwegian
language should be given a written standard. He claimed that all Norwegian dialects should be
the starting point for a Norwegian written standard. This led to the linguist travelling 27 000
km within the borders of Norway to find the Norwegian language. Mr Aasen also wrote songs
and poems which still are among the most popular in Norway. The Ivar Aasen Centre is
situated on the farm where Aasen was born and raised.
        The Norwegian parliament decided in 1885 that Norwegian Nynorsk and Norwegian
Bokmål should be two equal languages in Norway. That makes Norway one of the first
formally bilingual states in the world. Today Bokmål dominates, but Nynorsk is the most used
language in parts of Western Norway. Nynorsk has become a natural part of everyday life and
is today the first language of at least 550,000 Norwegians.
        In its interactive exhibition “The willingness of language” the centre presents the story
of Mr Aasen and Norwegian Nynorsk in international and historical perspectives. Every year
the centre produces one travelling exhibition about language or literature. The centre also offers
a varied cultural programme all year round for both children and adults. The highlight of the
year is the Norwegian Festival of Language and Arts, an annual celebration of the Nynorsk
written culture in the second weekend of June.
        The foundation Centre for Norwegian Language and Literature owns the Ivar Aasen
Centre, Olav H. Hauge Centre for all kinds of poetry, the Vinje Centre for non-fiction and
journalism, three festivals, an edited on-line encyclopaedia Allkunne.no and eight other
websites with more than 35 000 text documents. With 20 fulltime employees the foundation is
probably the largest literary museum in the Nordic countries.


                                                33
Language Movement Museum (1989), Bangladesh
Bhasha Andolon Jadughar
Dhaka, Bangladesh

www.banglaacademy.org.bd
info@banglaacademy.org.bd
Bangla Academy, Burdwan House, 3 Kazi Nazrul Islam Avenue, Ramna, BD-Dhaka 1000



The Bhasha Andolon Jadughar (Language Movement Museum) and Jatiya Sahitya O Lekhak
Jadughar (National Literature and Writer’s museum) are two museums which were opened by
then Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina Wajed to highlight the history, struggle and achievement of
the Bangla language and literature.
        Located on the second floor of the Bangla Academy’s Burdwan House, The Language
Movement Museum is unique as there’s no such museum in the subcontinent.
        It has precious memorabilia such as language martyr Abul Barakat's educational
certificates, Shafiur Rahman's spectacles, bag and coat, and photos of the entire language
movement from 1948 and its aftermath. One such photograph shows the penultimate time of
the movement, when students prepared at the historic Amtala (near the Arts Faculty Building
of Dhaka University) to break the Section 144 on 21 February 1952. Several of the displayed
photographs are by eminent researcher Professor Rafiqul Islam.
        Photos along with brief bios of Language Movement martyrs Rafique, Jabbar, Salam and
Barkat are also displayed at the museum. It also has rare documents such as memorandum that
was given to the then Governor General of Pakistan, Muhammad Ali Jinnah, by Rashtro Bhasha
Karmo Parishad. The memorandum highlights five points in favour of Bangla as the state
language. The address of welcome – containing demands for Bangla as the state language and
the overall grievances of the then East Pakistan – to the then visiting Prime Minister Liakat Ali
Khan by the students of Dhaka University is also at the museum. A couple of pages from the
journal of Tajuddin Ahmed, written on February 21 and 22, 1952, have been showcased as well.
        There are also paper cuttings from the Daily Azad, Ittefaq and Pakistan Observer
newspapers which were the leading newspapers during that period. Covers of several books on
the Language Movement are on display at the museum.


                                               34
Musée national de l’espéranto de Gray (1977), France
Nacia Esperanto-Muzeo
Gray, France

www.naciaesperantomuzeo.fr
michelinechateau@yahoo.fr
Maison Pour Tous, 19, rue Victor Hugo, F-70 100 Gray
Phone +33 6 21 51 38 69



The National Museum of Esperanto of Gray (Nacia Esperanto-Muzeo in Esperanto) was
founded in 1977and its official inauguration took place in 1987. It occupies a floor of the House
For All (an old school renovated) and consists of 10 rooms, for a total of 230 m2.
       Its collection includes approximately 6,000 books and pamphlets in or on Esperanto,
1,400 magazines and newspapers, both old and new. Over the years the gifts of Esperantists or
associations (archives and personal collections) have come to enrich its collections.
       The museum also includes collections of various objects (postage stamps, postcards,
promotional items, technical brochures) linked to Esperanto.




                                                35
Museo de Esperanto de Subirats (1968), Spain
Museu d’esperanto de Subirats
Sant Pau d'Ordal, Spain

http://www.museuesperanto.org
info@museuesperanto.org
C/ Dr. Zamenhof, 12 (Sant Pau d’Ordal), E-08739 Subirats, Catalonia
Phone +34 938 993 499



The Museo de Esperanto de Subirats, formerly known as Hispana Esperanto-muzeo (Spanish
Esperanto Museum), is a notable private collection of objects related to the Esperanto
international language, located in the Catalan town of Sant Pau d'Ordal, in a province of
Barcelona. The collection was developed over years by Lluís Hernández Yzal and his wife
Teresa Massana.
        The collection was inaugurated as a museum in 1968 as part of the dependencies of the
town pharmacy, run by Luis Hernández. Due to the constant growth of the bottom and the
insufficient space, in 1974 a land was bought on which the building that houses the museum is
built today. With the death of the founder in 2002, the museum went through a period of
inactivity. In 2010, it was officially reopened to the public.
        The museum contains about 15,000 newsletters and magazines of Esperanto
corresponding to about 400 different headers. The number of books is close to 8,000, the section
of posters and brochures, mainly related to congresses, is estimated at about 1,500. The set of
postcards collected add, between Esperantists and non-Esperantists, 150,000 copies.
        Among the most curious objects can be found a film roll of format 9.5 mm showing the
images of a Catalan congress held in Ripoll in 1935 and some handwritten notebooks by Luis
Lázaro Zamenhof corresponding to the translation of a work of Friedrich Schiller. Also
interesting are a set of cava bottles labeled in Esperanto, the popular “ŝlosiloj” small
pocketbooks to learn Esperanto, published in a multitude of languages, and some images when
Zamenhof visited Barcelona in 1909.




                                               36
Museo de la Lengua (2012), Argentina
Museum of Language UNGS
Los Polvorines, Argentina

www.ungs.edu.ar/ms_centro_cultural/?page_id=1507
museodelalengua@ungs.edu.ar
Museo de la Lengua, Universidad Nacional de General Sarmiento, Gutiérrez 1150, Los
Polvorines, Argentina
Phone +54 11 4469-7795



The Museum of Language UNGS was opened in September 2012 as a result of an exchange
with the Museum of the Book and Language of the National Library (opened in Buenos Aires in
October 2011). It is located on the campus of the National University of General Sarmiento.
        It is the result of the common participation and work of teachers, students and staff from
different parts of the university, which was created in 1993. The university intends to contribute
to democratisation of education and the access to knowledge to every sector of the society, and
looks for academic excellence.
        The museum involvs a research team undertaking the investigation into the Spanish of
Argentina and its varieties. Through various interactive and playful proposals, the museum
wants to raise awareness among visitors about a number of issues involving language that
often go unnoticed, not only because of lack of information, but also by prejudice strongly
rooted in society.
        The museum focuses on the Spanish of Argentina, from various aspects and angels.
It highlights the relationship of language with various arts, including literature, film, music and
humor, to reflect the different varieties of the country. Central themes are linguistic diversity,
the historical formation of the Spanish of Argentina and the demystification of a series of topics
or misleading platitudes about the language.
        Linguistic diversity is shown from the phonological point of view and lexicon of dialects
and different sociolects within the country and also from the contrast between domestic
varieties and other Spanish-speaking countries. This also includes indigenous languages like
Guarani, Quechua and Mapuche, and languages of immigration in Argentina, such as Oriental,
Slavic, Semitic and African languages. Further more attention is paid to the identity varieties of
Argentina, as the gaucho language and slang.




                                                37
Museo de la Tierra Guaraní (1978), Paraguay
Museum of the Guarani Land
Hernandarias, Paraguay

www.itaipu.gov.py/es/medio-ambiente/museo-de-la-tierra-guarani
info@portalguarani.com
Phone +595 61 5998638 or 61 5998606



The Museum of Itaipu dates from 1978. In 2000, it was renamed “Museum of the Guarani
Land” with a new layout that aims to highlight science and human facts. It is a walk through
history, a setting of 200 years of the Guarani culture.
        Itaipu has a museum that exhibits, holds and preserves the most representative of
human culture as well as the biological and physical heritage of the region where the dam is
settled.The guaraní language is present all over the Museum.
        The Museum of the Guarani Land offers a space for research, conservation, education
and spreading of Guarani culture and of the environment of the region.
        It is designed for education and tourism. It uses four languages: Spanish, Portuguese,
English, as a tourist language, and higlights the Guarani, which is present throughout the
Museum's stories and microfilms.
        The new hall speaks of the vision of the museum and has exciting educational tools. The
museography – unique in its design – includes backgrounds with images and texts that take
visitors on a journey through time though this territory. The course is complemented with
plasma monitors featuring interviews. There are seven monitors that complement the
information on the heritage of the Museum which are exhibited graphically and in display
windows.


                                              38
Museo del Dialetto dell'Alto Lario Occidentale (2007), Italy
Dosso del Liro, Italy

ambiente@cmalpilepontine.it
Via alla Chiesa, Dosso del Liro, I-22010 Dosso Del Liro CO
Phone +29 344 85218 or 344 82572



Dosso del Liro, Lombard common in the province of Como, lies in the northernmost part of the
province, on the border with Switzerland.
        The municipality Alto Lario is very active in the field of art and care of the natural
heritage: churches, palaces, but also footpaths, bridleways and chestnut. To safeguard the
particular dialect of the place, in 2007, was then inaugurated the Museum of the Alto Lario
Western dialect. This is a museum of the dialect of the language, mostly presenting sounds:
speech, words, proverbs and idioms related to the different dialects still spoken in the valleys of
Lario.
        The collection consists of audio and video recordings, categorized according to the
different backgrounds and illustrative of different dialects. The objects on display were donated
by the families of Dosso del Liro, and they serve as vital “illustrations” in names and words
that in some cases no longer exist. Among the themes of the exhibition are sounds, the names of
places, the boats of the lake, the names of things, from words to proverbs, and dialect written.




                                                39
Museo della Lingua Greco-Calabra “Gerhard Rohlfs” (2016)
Bova, Italy

www.casavacanzebovamarina.it/attrazioni-turistiche-nelle-vicinanze/bova/museo-della-lingua-
greco-calabra-gerhard-rohlfs/
info@casavacanzebovamarina.it
Museo di Reggio Calabria, Via Umberto I, 83 Bova Marina (RC)
Phone +39 328 64 24 285



On 21 May 2016, The Department of Linguistic Minorities of the Province of Reggio Calabria
opened this museum of the Greek-Calabrian language in Bova. The museum is dedicated to the
German linguist Gerhard Rohlfs, honorary citizen of Bova from 1968 and devoted to the study
of the Greek-Calabrian language, and aims to give voice to all the languages spoken in Calabria.
Eckart Rohlfs, son of the linguist, attended the opening ceremony and donated some artifacts
collected by his father during travels in Calabria from the first one in 1921 and later on.
        For decades, he devoted his life not only to the Greek language, but all spoken language
in Calabria. He published Historische Grammatik der italienischen Sprache und ihrer Mundarten
(1949–54, new edition 1966–69). Rohlfs studied many Italian dialects and was especially
concerned with the language contact btween Greek and dialects of Calabria, Puglia and Sicily.
        Rohlfs proved the link between Greek and Calabria that went beyond the written and
spoken language, and which influenced traditions, customs and habits of those territories.
        The museum is located right at the entrance of the village, at the exact spot where the
Englsh artist Edward Lear drew a glimpse of Bova during a travel 1842–46.




                                              40
Museu da Língua Portuguesa (2006), Brazil
São Paolo, Brasil

www.museudalinguaportuguesa.org.br
museu@museudalinguaportuguesa.org.br
Museu da Lingua Portuguesa, Praça da Luz, s/nº, Centro, São Paulo – SP
Phone +55 1 3326 0775



The Museum of the Portuguese Language is an interactive Portuguese language — and
Linguistics/Language Development in general — museum in São Paulo. It is housed in the
Estação da Luz railway station, in the urban district of the same name. 300 000 passengers
arrive and leave the station every day, and it was mainly here that thousands of non-
Portuguese speaking immigrants arriving from Europe and Asia into São Paulo via the Port of
Santos got acquainted with the language for the first time. The idea of this museum was
conceived by the São Paulo Secretary of Culture in conjunction with the Roberto Marinho
Foundation. The 4,300 square meters of space on three floors cost around 37 million reais.
        The objective of the museum is to create a living representation of the Portuguese
language, where visitors may be surprised and educated by unusual and unfamiliar aspects of
their own native language. The caretakers of the museum desire that the public has access to
new knowledge and reflection in an intense and pleasurable manner, as it notices the
relationship of the language with others, as well as its proto-languages. The museum targets the
Portuguese speaking population, made up of peoples from many regions and social
backgrounds, but who still have not had the opportunity to gain a broader understanding of
the origins, the history and the continuous evolution of the language. It also presents the
diversity of languages in Brazil, partly also in Latin America.
        “The language speaks for you. The purpose of studying and interacting with a language
in a museum, cultural and exchange programs, orthographic agreements, and the development
of new words show how important it is. The language is our mother. This museum covers
most, if not all, the aspects of the written and spoken language,” said the Minister of Culture
and singer Gilberto Gil at the opening ceremony on March 20, 2006.
        On 21 December 2015, a fire destroyed parts of the museum and killed a fireman. The
temporary exhibition area that caught fire had only replica objects on display. A rebuilt
museum may open in 2019.

                                               41
Museum Ladin Ćiastel de Tor (2001), Italy
St. Martin in Thurn, Italy

www.museumladin.it/en/the-museum.asp
info@museumladin.it
Torstr. 65, 39030 St. Martin in Thurn, Italy
Phone +39 0474 52 40 20



There are tausends of languages, in ladin: lingac ne ele di milesc. In the very heart of the
Dolomites live more than 30,000 Dolomite Ladins whose identity may be characterised by the
uniqueness of their language, derived from popular Latin, the heart of the southern Alps.
Thanks to the physical characteristics of the landscape in thr southern Alps, the Ladin language
has survived. It is the eldest of all languages spoken in this region and is restricted by the
Italian and the German cultural and linguistic areas that surround it.
        The way through the museum focuses on some significant aspects of the present and
past lives of the Dolomite Ladins, highlighting the important influences of cross-regional events
on the lives of the population and pinpointing the existing interrelations between landscape
forms and lifestyles.
        A consciousness of their language plays an important role in the identity of the Ladins.
The Ladin language finds its roots in popular-Latin influenced by pre-Roman-Rhaetian
elements. In the Middle Ages and in modern times, the geographical position of the Ladin
areas, surrounded as they are by German and Italian speaking areas, influenced the further
development of the language as well as the differences between the various valleys.
        The Ladin language serves as a form of self assertion towards the outside, but also as a
link between the five Ladin valley communities. Following the First World War, the
subdivision of the valleys between three Italian provinces – Belluno, Trentino and South Tyrol –
inhibited this process, and the division remained even after the Second World War. The
recognition of the Ladins as a distinct ethnic and linguistic group therefore developed in a
different way in each of the three provinces.

                                               42
Museum of the Basque language (2004), Basque Country, Spain
Euskararen Etxea
Bilbao, Spain

http://www.azkuefundazioa.org/#!/euskararen-etxea/
info@azkuefundazioa.org
Azkue Fundazioa, Agoitz plaza 1, E-48015 Bilbao, Vizcaya
Phone +34 94 402 80 81



The Museum of the Basque language is in San Inazio, a quiet neighbourhood, not far from
downtown Bilbao. This museum offers a nice approach to the traditions and culture of the
Basque Country. This four-store building, committed to the study and understanding of the
Basque language, is the perfect showcase to discover “Euskara”.
         First floor looks like a railway station, and it represents the voyage of “Euskara”
through the time (“Euskara” is the oldest language in Europe). Every single detail is included,
wagons, locomotive, tunnel… Euskara has a bunch of different dialects, a complex history, and
all that is included; the etymology of the main words, literature…

El Museo Euskararen Etxea o La Casa del Euskera funciona desde diciembre de 2004 abierto
para todos los que quieran conocer la importante lengua del País Vasco en sus 4 plantas
divididos en 2 espacios en los que se muestra el trabajo de asociaciones y entidades que
trabajan con temas relacionados al Euskera como la Asociación de Escritores Vascos,
Topagunea que es la Federación de Asociaciones de Euskera o la Asociación de Ikastolas de
Bizkaia, entre otras.
        En otro espacio, que se ubica en las primeras plantas del Museo, se estudian y muestran
los diferentes usos y actividades del Euskera, como el Centro de Interpretación del Euskera que
tiene la muestra de forma muy agradable los contenidos básicos de la lengua Vasca.
        Dentro de este espacio, en la segunda planta, se encuentra el Archivo Multimedia del
Euskera, el depósito de Libros Universitarios en Euskera, que contiene ejemplares desde el año
1990 hasta la actualidad y la Sala Polivalente.
        Es un paso fundamental en su visita a Bilbao, para poder conocer a fondo su cultura y
tradiciones, para respetarlas en sus paseos por la Villa y disfrutarlos mucho más conociendo, no
sólo algunas palabras sino también el motivo por el cual esta bella lengua tiene fuerte presencia
y es amada por los bilbaínos.

                                               43
Museum of the Lithuanian Language (2006), Lithuania
Vilnius, Lithuania

www.lki.lt
Lituanistika@lki.lt
Institute of the Lithuanian Language, P. Vileišio g. 5, LT-10308 Vilnius
Phone +370 5 263 81 12



The Language Museum under the name of ‘The Lithuanian Hearth’ was founded in 2006 as a
department of the Institute of the Lithuanian Language, which is the governmental research
institute of Lithuania, founded in 1941.
       The goals of the museum include raising awareness of language as a key factor for
promoting national identity and citizenship; promoting the ideas about language as the main
factor of creativity; promoting multilingualism and multiculturalism, linguistic identity and
diversity; and disseminating the latest research knowledge in Lithuanian linguistic.
       Level one is academic information and historical artefacts. Each topic has an interactive
informational portal that displays encyclopaedic information. This informational level of the
display also covers the artefacts available to the institute: historical documents, unique items,
reconstructions. Every exhibit (artefact) conveys relevant historical, cultural, and linguistic
contexts that are significant for the development and history of language, linguistics, and
writing. The information is expanded through legends, references to other exhibits at the
museum, and additional information in info portals.
       The most exciting part of the museum is its interactive objects, the language toys.
Interactive language toys are unique exhibits which can help visitors reach out and touch the
language. These exhibits also reflect all 12 of the language topics displayed. Every object serves
the purpose of raising awareness of the history, change, structure, variation, creative potential,
communicational and other attributes of language, educate visitors, stir a creative spark in
them, inspire and encourage them to take advantage of the opportunities language provides
when it comes to self-expression, creative processes and communication. For example, there is
The Tree of the Genetic Classification of Languages. Words as Fossils invites visitors to become
language archaeologists. An interactive map shows the prehistory of the Lithuanian language
and the ancestors of the nation. The House of Word Origin shows how words make their way
into a language, and the Lithuanian alphabet is showcased by another interactive object.


                                                44
Nüshu Museum (女书) (2004), China
Puwei, Jiangyong, Hunan, China

www.hnmuseum.com/hnmuseum/eng/main_index.jsp
web@hnmuseum.com
Hunan Provincial Museum, No.50 Dong Feng Road Chang Sha, 410005
Phone +86 731 84514630 or 731 84535566-8605



In 1990, Zhao visited Yang Huanyi, who was then 81 years old and was the only known
genuine nushu speaker left in Jiangyong.
        "Nushu is spread mostly among rural women who had their feet bound to a tiny size,"
Zhao said.
        Yang started to read and write nushu as a little girl with her seven sworn sisters. Yang
watched nushu's wax and wane in the past century, and would even write nushu on her knees,
as only men were allowed to write on tablets.
        On September 20, 2004, Yang passed away. Unfortunately, none of Yang's children and
grandchildren inherited her proficiency in this unique language.
        Experts said that Yang's death marked the end to the tradition in which women shared
their innermost feelings with female friends through a set of codes incomprehensible to men.
        Local authorities in the late 1990s started to attach importance to nushu's cultural value
and tourism potential. In 2000, a free nushu training school was set up in Puwei Village in
Jiangyong for women learning the language in their spare time.
        With a total population of around 200 people, Puwei is one of the most famous villages
for nushu culture. In 2004, the Nushu Museum was founded in the village, where visitors and
villagers can take nushu classes. Meanwhile, tourists can also enjoy the unique female social life
and cultural ecology.

                                                45
Sòn de Lenga Museum (1999), Italy
Museum of Occitan Language
Dronero, Italy

www.espaci-occitan.org
segreteria@espaci-occitan.org
Espaci Occitan, Via Val Maira 19, I-12025 Dronero CN, Italy
Phone +39 0171 904075



The name Occitan was first used by Dante Alighieri. Today Occitan, a new Latin language, is
spoken in regions of southern France, such as Gascony, Languedoc, Auvergne, Limousin and
Provence. Occitan is also present in Aran valley in Spain. In Italy, the language is spoken in 120
villages inhabited by 180,000 people in Imperia, Cuneo and Torino provinces, as well as in
Calabria, in Guardia Piemontese, a village populated in the 15th century by Waldensians
coming from Piedmont. The Italian Parliament adopted a Protection Law for Linguistic
Minorities, also called “Law 482”, on 15th December 1999.
         Espaci Occitan is an Association of Public Institutions which aims at promoting Occitan
culture, language and tourism. Featuring the Institute of Occitan Studies, Sòn de Lenga
Museum and an Occitan Library, Espaci Occitan is the first cultural centre dedicated to the
Occitan world.
         The Institute of Studies numbers thousands of books and CDs about language, culture
and traditions of the Occitan territory; it also offers the opportunity to hear and watch music
and movies. Moreover, it has an on-line linguistic service, offering translations, advices about
linguistics and toponymy, frontal or on-line language courses, social reading.
         Sòn de Lenga, a museum dedicated to the Occitan language, is a pleasant way to
approach the Occitan culture. It illustrates literature, music, traditions, history, material and
social life of the Occitan territory. The multimedia museum was created in 2002 and completely
renovated in 2015 thanks to private and public funds. It features ten computerized stations
dedicated to geography, history, art, literature and other main themes of Occitan culture, such
as music. The workstations are available in Italian, Occitan, English and French.

                                                46
Sprachpanorama (2017), Switzerland
Laufenburg, Switzerland

www.sprachpanorama.ch
info@sprachpanorama.ch
Verein Sprachpanorama, Zeughausgässli 102, CH-5080 Laufenburg
Phone +41 062 558 55 22

Das Sprachpanorama Laufenburg wurde im Mai 2017 eröffnet und wird vom Verein
Sprachpanorama betrieben. Das Museum liegt in der Laufenburger Altstadt in unmittelbarer
Nähe zum Rhein. Die Besucherinnen und Besucher können in der Ausstellung im doppelten
Sinne Sprache begreifen und vertiefte Einblicke in verschiedene Bereiche der Sprache und
Kommunikation aus Forschung und Praxis erhalten. Auf rund 250m2 Fläche gibt es viel zum
Raten, Erkunden und Herausfinden durch Klappen, Drehen, Tippen, Einzeichnen, Klicken,
Hören usw. Vier Themenfelder werden präsentiert:
• Sprachgeschichte: Zur Entwicklung der deutschen Sprache von den Anfängen bis ins 20.
    Jahrhundert.
• Sprachen der Welt: Zur Vielfalt der natürlichen Sprachen und Sprachfamilien rund um den
    Globus.
• Dialekt: Zur Schweizer Dialektvielfalt, deren Erforschung und deren Verwendung in
    Literatur und in (neuen) Medien.
• Lesen: Zum Lesen in früheren Epochen, Lesenlehren und -lernen anno dazumal und in
    verschiedenen Sprachen, aber auch dazu, wie wir diese komplexe Fertigkeit meistern.
        In einem eigenen Raum werden Sprachprojekte von Schüler/-innen präsentiert.
Periodisch finden Veranstaltungen mit sprachlichem Bezug statt. Das museumspädagogisches
Angebot für Schülerinnen und Schüler ermöglicht ausserschulisches Lernen über Sprache unter
Berücksichtigung curricularer Vorgaben. Es soll gerade auch bei den Jugendlichen Interesse für
historische, soziologische, kognitive und systematische Aspekte von Sprache geweckt werden.

                                              47
SprachRaum (2010), Germany
Buchen (Odenwald), Germany

www.bezirksmuseum.de
info@bezirksmuseum.de
Kellereistraße 25 & 29, 74722 Buchen (Odenwald)
Telefon: +49 160 905 68 244

Das Bezirksmuseum Buchen hat beschlossen, im Trunzerhaus im Areal der Kurmainzischen
Kellerei in Buchen einen Raum einzurichten, in dem mit moderner Technik Mundarten
erschlossen werden. Im Mittelpunkt stehen die Mundarten im Odenwald-/Baulandgebiet.
        Seit Mitte 2010 werden raum-typische Dialekte elektronisch aufgezeichnet. Vorgegebene
Texte und Texte aus den unerschöpflichen Quellen von Sagen und Geschichten in den
Odenwald-/Baulandgebieten wurden und werden weiter von einheimischen Sprecherinnen
und Sprechern in der Originalmundart des eigenen Wohnorts aufgesprochen.
        Diese Aufzeichnungen werden im SprachRaum hörbar gemacht. Auf interaktiv
programmierten Tafeln können die Sprachbeispiele geografischen Gebieten zugeordnet
werden. Mit verschiedenen Eingabemöglichkeiten können die verschiedenen Dialekte erraten
werden, auch in das Geflecht süddeutscher und anderer Gebiete.
‚       Das Projekt SprachRaum versteht sich als Portal zu den Alltagssprachen in
Süddeutschland. Natürlich kann der beschriebene SprachRaum nicht isoliert betrachtet werden.
Er ist Teil der Sprachen, Mundarten und Dialekte, die im Lauf der sozio-kulturellen
Entwicklungen in den deutschsprachigen Gebieten entstanden sind. Heutige Staats-, Landes-,
Kreis- und Gemeindegrenzen spielen nahezu keine Rolle. Dazu vermitteln wir Informationen
aus der Welt der Dialektologie.
        Ergänzend gibt es den virtuellen SprachRaum www.sprachraum.de.

                                             48
wortreich (2011), Germany
Bad Hersfeld, Germany

www.wortreich-badhersfeld.de
info@wortreich-badhersfeld.de
wortreich in Bad Hersfeld, Benno-Schilde-Platz 1, D-36251 Bad Hersfeld
Phone +49 6621 794890



The wortreich Museum, opened in October 2011, is exactly what its name implies: wortreich is
German for “in many words”, but it is also an allusion to the “reign of words”: The wortreich
is the main attraction in Schilde-Park, in a tall early 20th century industrial building, an
industrial monument which is now considered a heritage building.
        The project proposes an interesting combination of a restored old wrapper on outside of
the building with a latest generation participatory museum inside: the museum’s focus is on
language and communications. Konrad Duden, inventor of official German spelling, and as
well as Konrad Zuse, inventor of the computer, lived and worked in Bad Hersfeld for some
years.
        The permanent exhibition is designed like a book, divided into chapters; visitors are
guided through more than 90 interactive stations suitable for all ages. Temporary exhibitions
usually focus on communications in one way or another, and often on language.




                                              49
Yazi Tarihi Müzesi (2003), Kazakhstan
Museum of the History of Writing
Astana, Kazakhstan

http://ff.enu.kz
zharkynbekova_shk@enu.kz
Eurasian National University, 010008 Astana, Satpayev st., 2, Kazakhstan
Phone: +7 (7172) 32209 ext.: 32209



L.N. Gumilyov Eurasian National University in Astana hosts a museum of the history of
writing for scientific, educational and cultural matters. The museum was opened in 2003.
        The oldest written monuments of Scandinavia reflecting the Slavic-Scandinavian
communications of an era of Vikings are runic inscriptions. However, scientific research works
have proved that it is Turkic writings. In 1893, the Danish linguist and Turkologist Wilhelm
Thomsen deciphered texts found in the Orkhon valley in Mongolia and might have been the
first ever to read the words “Turkoman” and “Tengri”.
        The Turkic and the Kazakh people early applied the Arab writing system. In 1926,
Ahmet Baytursynov reformed the Kazakh writing based on this system. He excluded all purely
Arab letters not in use in the Kazakh language, and he added letters specific to the Kazakh
language. During the Soviet period, the Kazakh alphabet was translated into Latin letters for
political reasons, and then one more transfer to Cyrillics was carried out. Now the Kazakh
language in Kazakhstan uses Cyrillics, however, there is a discussion aboutn the possible return
to the Latin akphabet.
        May 19–20 in 2014, the international forum “Tүrkі zhazuy kүnі” (Day of Turkic writing),
was held for the first time in Astana.
        The exhibitions are focused on knowledge of history of writing, presenting samples of
the letter which the Turkic people of the Eurasian region used. A special exhibition room has
been opened for exhibitions from Mongolia, Xian and Altay.



                                              50
Yugambeh Museum (1995), Australia
Language and Heritage research centre
Beenleigh, Australia

www.yugambeh.com
admin@yugambeh.com
Yugambeh Museum, Cnr Martens St and Plantation Rd, Beenleigh 4207, Queensland
Phone +61 7 3807 6155 or 7 3807 6229



Yugambeh Museum, Language and Heritage Research Centre is identified as the major source
of information for researchers of Yugambeh cultural heritage including landscape, place and
objects.
         Vision: To tell the ongoing Yugambeh story, defining the spiritual and cultural
traditions of the Yugambeh people, in a spirit of shared history through education programs,
exhibitions and ceremonies.
         Mission: To collect and maintain items and intellectual property that are evidence of the
language, history and culture of the traditional Aboriginals of the Yugambeh Region and to use
it for education, research and cultural enrichment of the Yugambeh community and the
community in general.
         The museum was opened in 1995 by Senator Neville Bonner, Australia’s first Aboriginal
Federal Parliamentarian, and is one of Australia’s leading language and cultural organisations.
In addition to promoting language and culture in the regions of Gold Coast, Logan and the
Scenic Rim, the Museum also auspices funding and provides services for other Aboriginal
communities through southern Queensland, extending to the Northern Territory border.
         In 2012 the Museum completed construction of a new exhibition space and training
complex. The Museum has offered mentoring and training opportunities for countless
Aboriginal people. It continues to offer trainee positions to Aboriginal youth, and engage
community members in ongoing language and cultural projects. The Yugambeh Museum offers
a number of resources which are available to visitors. These include an extensive library and
collection of artifacts, other collections, language resources, computers and photocopying
facilities.




                                                51
52
                    Museums
of writing and written culture




   53
54
China Book Culture Exhibition Hall (2008), China
Beijing, China



A new cultural institution showcasing the history of Chinese characters and books has made its
debut in Beijing. The China Book Culture Exhibition Hall aims to show how this vital source of
human knowledge has evolved.
        Historical records show that China's earliest books date back to the Shang Dynasty, in
1700 B.C.
        The forerunner to compiling complete books was the emergence of characters. Before
characters Chinese ancestors used knots to mark their daily affairs. Eventually, they began to
inscribe numbers and characters on slices of bamboo or wood.
        China's earliest books were made of thin strips of bamboo linked together with threads.
The technique can be traced to the Warring States Period, about 2,400 years ago. The ancient
method was used by subsequent dynasties for more than 1,700 years. Some of these ancient
books are now housed in the Shanghai Museum.
        In today's society, it is important for people to pay attention to copyrights. The world's
earliest copyright statement was inscribed on a book titled "Affairs of Eastern Capital" dating
back to the southern Song Dynasty, about 900 years ago.
        The publication of books relies on typography. Ancient Chinese invented two methods
of printing – engraving and typing.
        China's earliest engraving book was made during the Tang Dynasty, in the year 868.
        Books with colour were first produced in China during the Ming Dynasty, about 600
years ago.
        The exhibition puts on display many of these historical documents, as well as the
electronic reading material of today.

“New museum celebrates history of writing”, CCTV.com, December 20, 2008




                                                55
Deutsches Buch- und Schriftmuseum (1884), Germany
Leipzig, Germany

http://www.dnb.de/DE/DBSM/dbsm_node.html;jsessionid=87E10CE69FF09045940F70C1EE0186
89.prod-worker2
dbsm@dnb.de
Deutscher Platz 1, D‑04103 Leipzig
Phone +49 341 2271 324



Das Buch hat wie kein anderes Medium unsere Kultur und Zivilisation geprägt: Seit
Jahrhunderten wird unser Wissen über die Welt und über den Menschen in Büchern
gespeichert, tradiert und fortgeschrieben. Die Sammlung, Ausstellung und wissenschaftliche
Bearbeitung buch‑ und mediengeschichtlicher Zeugnisse ist die Aufgabe des Deutschen Buch‑
und Schriftmuseums. 1884 als Deutsches Buchgewerbemuseum in Leipzig gegründet und nach
dem kriegsbedingten Verlust von Teilbeständen und Gebäude 1950 in die Deutsche Bücherei
integriert, gilt es als das weltweit älteste und nach Umfang und Qualität der Bestände als eines
der bedeutendsten Museen auf dem Gebiet der Buchkultur.
        Im Fokus der heutigen Arbeit steht das Buch mit seinen zahllosen Gesichtern: als geniale
Formfindung und als Produkt wirtschaftlicher und technischer Prozesse, als gesellschaftliche
Ikone und wichtigster Kulturträger, ebenso das Buch als Kunstwerk und als zensierter und
verbrannter Ideenspeicher. Das Anliegen des Museums ist, das zum einen die Funktion einer
wissenschaftlichen Dokumentationsstätte für Buchkultur und Mediengeschichte wahrnimmt
und zum anderen mit seinen Ausstellungen und museumspädagogischen Programmen als ein
lebendiger Ort kultureller Bildung und Vermittlung einlädt.
        Klimatisierte Depots, erweiterte Arbeitsflächen und großzügige öffentliche Bereiche
bieten optimale Bedingungen für die Langzeitbewahrung und Nutzung des Bestandes. In
einem modernen Lesesaal werden die Fachbibliothek und der museale Fundus von mehr als
einer Million Objekte für Forschung, Studium und Praxis bereitgestellt.
        Als Schaufenster der Deutschen Nationalbibliothek bietet die Dauerausstellung des
Museums Einblick in 5000 Jahre Mediengeschichte der Menschheit. Unter dem Titel „Zeichen –
Bücher – Netze: Von der Keilschrift zum Binärcode“ wird der Bogen von der Entstehung der
frühen Schriftsysteme über den Buchdruck mit beweglichen Lettern bis zur digitalen Netzwelt
gespannt und augenzwinkernd Ausblick in die Zukunft der Informationsgesellschaft gegeben.

                                               56
Gutenberg Museum (1901), Germany
Museum für Buch-, Druck und Schriftgeschichte aller Kulturen
Mainz, Germany

www.gutenberg-museum.de
gutenberg-museum@stadt.mainz.de
Gutenberg Museum, Liebfrauenplatz 5, D-55116 Mainz
Phone +49 6131 1226 40/44



The Gutenberg Museum is one of the oldest museums of printing in the world and attracts
experts and tourists from all corners of the globe.
         In 1900, 500 years after Gutenberg’s birth, a group of citizens founded the museum in
Mainz. They wanted to honour the inventor, today’s “man of the millennium”, and present his
technical and artistic achievements to the public at large. They also aimed to exhibit the writing
and printing of as many different cultures as possible.
         To help launch the museum, a number of publishers, manufacturers of printing
machines and printing houses donated books, apparatus and machines. These formed the basis
of the collection. In its first few years the museum was part of the city library. In time the
museum expanded to include sections on printing techniques, book art, job printing and ex-
libris, graphics and posters, paper, the history of writing of all cultures of the world and
modern artists’ books.
         The Gutenberg Museum was originally laid out in two rooms at the Kurfürstliches
Schloß in Mainz, which also accommodated the city library. 1925 saw the installation of a
reconstruction of Gutenberg’s workshop which soon became one of the museum’s main
attractions. Type founding, typesetting and printing could now be demonstrated visually. In
1927 the museum was able to move into the Römischer Kaiser (1664), one of the most beautiful
buildings in Mainz. In 1962, the year Mainz celebrated its 2,000th anniversary, the restoration of
the Römischer Kaiser was complete and the building ready for use again. A new, modern
exhibition building was also opened, constructed with money donated by a number of
generous sponsors.
         A century after its founding, on the 600th anniversary of Gutenberg´s birth the old
museum building was restored and extended. The museum exhibits are now in a more up-to-
date, lively setting.

                                                57
JAARS Museum of the Alphabet (1961), USA
Waxhaw, North Carolina, USA

www.jaars.org/museum/alphabet
museum_of_the_alphabet@jaars.org
JAARS Alphabet Museum, Box 248, Waxhaw, North Carolina 28173
Phone +1 704 843 6066



The Museum of the Alphabet contains a colorful and impressive array of displays and artifacts
depicting the history and development of inscribed languages. Where did writing begin? How
did alphabets develop? Are there still languages today without a written form? These questions
and many more are graphically answered as the Museum of the Alphabet traces the history of
alphabets and other writing-systems from the beginning to the present. The world’s writing
systems are artistically unfolded, as both ancient and modern alphabet-makers are highlighted
in the picturesque settings of the museum displays.
        The Museum of the Alphabet was proposed by William Cameron Townsend, founder of
SIL International. His purpose in such a museum was to focus on the gift of written language.
Richard Pittman came up with two guidelines in developing the museum: “Focus on the
alphabet makers, and select the stories first, not the artifacts.” With a 4,900 square-foot
multimedia exhibition, the museum vibrantly tells the story of alphabet makers from ancient
history to modern times.
        A web site highlighting some of the points of interest of the Museum of the Alphabet,
with excerpts from the book The Alphabet Makers has been created independently as a public
service. This site presents several tours of the museum from different perspectives: the museum
galleries, significant people in the development of writing systems, and samples of a variety of
scripts from around the world. The initial goal is to disseminate to a broader audience what the
museum has to offer, as depicted in the book.


                                               58
Klingspor-Museum Offenbach (1953), Germany
Internationale Buch- und Schriftkunst
Offenbach am Main, Germany

www.klingspor-museum.de
klingspormuseum@offenbach.de
Klingspor-Museum Offenbach, Herrnstraße 80, D-63065 Offenbach am Main
Phone +49 69 8065-3511



Am 7. November 1953 öffnete das Klingspor-Museum zum ersten Mal für seine Besucher die
Türen. Die Stadt Offenbach am Main hatte in den armen Nachkriegsjahren ein kleines Museum
zur modernen Buch- und Schriftkunst gegründet. Den Grundstock des Museums bildete die
kostbare Privatsammlung von Dr. h.c. Karl Klingspor (1868–1950), der in der ersten Hälfte des
20. Jahrhunderts in Offenbach am Main mit seinem Bruder eine Schriftgießerei betrieb.
        Hier geht es zu einer mehrseitigen Chronik der Schriftgießerei Klingspor und einer Liste
aller bei der Schriftgießerei Gebrüder Klingspor gegossener Schriften
        Die Schriftgießerei Gebrüder Klingspor in Offenbach am Main hatte Weltruf. Die private
Büchersammlung von Dr. Karl Klingspor wurde im Jahre 1927 bei der internationalen
Buchausstellung in Leipzig als „Zimmer eines Bibliophilen“ gezeigt und viel bewundert. Seine
hundert Ledereinbände des Buchbinders Ignatz Wiemeler sind bis heute ein unschätzbares
Schmuckstück des Klingspor-Museums.
        Die Sammelgebiete des Museums umfassen: Illustrierte Bücher, Pressendrucke,
Malerbücher, Künstlerbücher, Schriftmusterbücher, Schriftproben, Handschriften und
kalligrafische Blätter. Die reichhaltige Fachliteratur zur Buchkunde, Geschichte des Buchdrucks
und der Schrift, zur Typographie und Kalligraphie, zu den grafischen Techniken und zur
Papierkunde stehen jedermann nach vorheriger Anmeldung in der Bibliothek zur Verfügung.
Alle Bestände des Museums sind durch ein Katalogsystem erschlossen.
        Ständig wechselnde Ausstellungen mit wertvollen Exponaten aus den eigenen
Sammlungen sowie mit Leihgaben von Künstlern und Sammlern zeigen die Vielfalt der Buch-
und Schriftkunst des 20. Jahrhunderts auf internationaler Ebene.
        Seit 1965 wird jährlich in den Wintermonaten Dezember bis Februar die internationale
Bilderbuchausstellung „Bunte Kinderwelt“ gezeigt. Die Eröffnungen jeweils am 1.
Adventssonntag sind für Kinder und Erwachsene immer ein Fest für Augen und Gaumen: Die
Verlage nehmen unaufgefordert diese Gelegenheit wahr, ihre Publikationen einem
interessierten Leserkreis, Kindern wie Erwachsenen, zu präsentieren.


                                               59
Musée Champollion – Les Écritures du Monde (2007), France
Champollion museum – writings of the world
Figeac, France

www.musee-champollion.fr
musee@ville-figeac.fr
Musée Champollion, place Champollion, 46100 Figeac, France
Phone +33 05 65 50 31 08

Established in the native house of Jean François Champollion, the man who deciphered the
Egyptian hieroglyphics, this museum of writing takes the visitors on a journey following
Champollion’s footsteps and gives them the opportunity to take part in the adventure of the
written word and consider its place in a future world. From Champollion’s work on ancient
writings and languages, the collection tells the story of the invention of writing in various
places around the world
        The oldest graphic inscriptions go back some 50,000 years, however it was only 5,300
years ago that mankind transposed his thoughts into signs that fixed his words, enabling him to
communicate in a permanent fashion with his fellow beings. Champollion’s museum tries to
give answers to questions such as how were the first signs written? What were the conse-
quences of this fabulous invention? Are there still writing systems waiting to be deciphered?
        Documents from around the world, interactive touch pads and the shapes of enigmatic
scripts are displayed. Visitors are given the opportunity to take part in the adventure of the
written word and to be confronted with the earliest scripts invented by civilisations throughout
the world. The visitors discover how the first Mesopotamian’s tablets were inscribed in
cuneiform script with details of economic exchanges and administration. Travelling along the
bank of Nile, they learn how the Egyptians painted, drew and engraved hieroglyphs in order to
perpetuate their existence. Observing works of art written in Chinese ideograms, which are still
in use today, and Maya Glyphs from Central America, complete the journey.
        Archaeological artefacts with alphabets invented around the Mediterreanean sea are
also displayed to prove how a writing system using a limited number of symbols was a true
revolution allowing much more people to learn reading and writing. Finally, many books from
medieval parchment to e-book are also displayed to show how we have kept our memory in
Europe since the middle ages.

                                               60
Museo del Libro y de la Lengua (2011), Argentina
Museum of Book and Language
Buenos Aires, Argentina

www.bn.gov.ar/museo-del-libro-y-de-la-lengua
museodellibro@bn.gov.ar
Av. Gral. Las Heras 2555, Buenos Aires, C1425ASC CABA, Argentina
Phine +54 11 48 080 090



The Museum of Book and Language was initiated by the National Library and opened its doors
to the public at 10 October 2011. It is designed as a tour of the national culture and the
experience of Argentinian speakers and readers.
        The museum occupies two buildings and covers 1,500 suare meters on three floors. The
construction cost 12.3 million pesos, including the completion of the work of the National
Library. There is a permanent exhibition dedicated to the book and the history of publishing in
Argentina. The language part mainly deals with the tension between Spanish and indigenous
languages, the heterogeneity of the forms of speech in Argentina and the need autonomy of
language in the Rio del Plata against the Spanish in Spain.
        There will be a strong presence of artists putting the axis of the book and the language in
art works. In addition, the museum will have a fun character for adults and kids, so the director
Maria Pia Lopez said before the opening. This means that the museum wants to be an artistic
space with playful experience and educational commitment. Here, and across different devices
(panels, showcases, games and multimedia content), the language spoken by the Argentines in
their regional heterogeneity and its transformations language unfolds.
        The collections include art, technology, pedagogies and reflections from different
disciplines, offering visitors an interactive relationship and inviting them to be the creators and
custodians of a common treasury.
        The exhibitions may be experienced by the visitors on their own, but guided tours are
also offered. Interaction with school institutions is not limited to a visit, because the museum
offers a series of educational proposals to be evaluated and carried out by professors and
teachers at its homepage.


                                                61
Museum für Kommunikation (1898), Germany
Berlin, Germany

www.mfk-berlin.de/
mfk-berlin@mspt.de
Leipziger Straße 16, D-10117 Berlin-Mitte
Phone +49 030 202 94 0



Das Museum für Kommunikation Berlin bringt Vergangenheit und Zukunft unter ein Dach:
Mit der Dauerausstellung macht es die Herkunft, die Entwicklung und die
Zukunftsperspektiven der Informationsgesellschaft erleb- und begreifbar. Attraktive
Wechselausstellungen richten den Blick auf die unterschiedlichen Aspekte von
Kommunikation.
        Das Museum für Kommunikation Berlin versteht sich als Ort der Begegnung, des
Austauschs, der Unterhaltung, kurz der Kommunikation. Im Vordergrund stehen dabei der
veränderte Umgang mit Zeichen, Codes und Medien und die daraus entstehenden
Veränderungen im privaten wie im öffentlichen Leben. Dabei bietet das Museum auch eine
klassische und umfangreiche Sammlung von historischen Objekten. In seiner Schatzkammer
präsentiert das Museum kostbare Exponate, allen voran die Blaue und die Rote Mauritius.
        Die Dauerausstellung des Museums veranschaulicht die Vergangenheit, Gegenwart und
Zukunftsperspektiven der Informationsgesellschaft. Ausgehend vom Lichthof als
architektonischem Schlüsselraum, erschließt sich das gesamte Haus über die Galerien.
        Seit seiner Eröffnung im Jahr 1898, in einem Gebäude mit prachtvoller Architektur,
durchlief das Museum eine wechselvolle Geschichte. Während der Schließung im Zweiten
Weltkrieg wurde der überwiegende Teil der Sammlung ausgelagert und nach Kriegsende nach
Hessen gebracht, wo er den Grundstock für das „Bundespostmuseum“ in Frankfurt bildete.
Das Gebäude in Ostberlin wurde 1958 behelfsmäßig in stand gesetzt und als Postmuseum
eröffnet. Westberlin gründete 1966 das „Berliner Post- und Fernmeldemuseum“ in der Urania.
Die Wiedervereinigung im Jahr 1989 brachte auch für die Museen eine Wende: Seit März 2000
sind die beiden Berliner Museen wieder an einem Standort vereint.




                                            62
Museum für Kommunikation (1907), Switzerland
Bern, Switzerland

www.mfk.ch
communication@mfk.ch
Museum für Kommunikation, Helvetiastrasse 16, CH–3000 Bern 6
Phone +41 031 357 55 55



The Museum of Communication is unique in Switzerland because of its collections and
exhibitions. Based on this strong grounding in its thematic material in the future it will be able
to operate as a competence centre, addressing questions of the social and cultural effects of
communication and its technologies.
         The museum does not put technology, but rather people in the centre of its focus. In its
position as a transmitter of information its orientation is based on the needs and experiences of
its visitors. The museum's interactive exhibitions aim to promote an intensive and eventful
analysis of the topics shown.
         Transfer (museum education, consulting) and market orientation (marketing / PR) are
thus as much integral elements of the museum's policy as the traditional functions of collecting,
conservation, exhibiting and research. Within the framework of its cultural mission the
museum thus operates with business standards.
         The Museum of Communication wants to be a catalyst for the involvement with the
history – but also with the present and future – of communication. The main focus of attention
lies within the relationship between communication and culture. From this perspective the
museum's collections on telecommunication and information science, on radio and television,
post, transportation, tourism and philately allow it to serve a broad spectrum of the public.
         The museum also particularly focuses on new developments, especially in the areas of
information and communication technologies, and on the new media. In this way it contributes
to the discussion of current and linked issues.
         The invention of script over 5,000 years ago allowed people to record information on
appropriate surfaces, transport these "messages" and thus communicate over great distances –
from stone tablet to SMS: Several workshops and games serve to heighten visitors' experiences
of the permanent exhibition "so near and yet so far: People and their Media".



                                                63
Museum of Writing (1999), England
London, England

www.ies.sas.ac.uk
ies@sas.ac.uk
Institute of English Studies, School of Advanced Study, University of London, Senate House,
Malet Street, London WC1E 7HU
Phone +44 0207 862 8675



The museum's collections are an acknowledged resource for information through written and
electronic articles, consultancy, exhibitions, loans and as an image provider. Negotiations are
currently in progress to establish the museum in central London, England, initially as a research
and education centre and, in the near future, available for public viewing.
         The Museum of Writing is focused on matters central to the historical and theoretical
understanding of writing from its invention to the present. The repository showcases materials
housed at the Senate House Library at the University of London. The online environment will
provide interpretative exhibits and an interface for browsing the museum’s collections as
digital images and descriptive record while pointing to the existence of the analogue artifacts
available for more advanced research.
         The notion of writing around which the museum’s programmes are built is defined as a
set of technologies for the production of written forms through inscription, handwriting, print,
or any other means. Thus, the museum’s mission extends to the history of books, scripts,
notation systems, and materials for their production. But the museum’s research and
educational mission also includes attention to basic questions of literacy and communication in
their many cultural dimensions. The museum’s goal is to create a networked environment for
information about the history and theory of writing as a material form, by promoting
scholarship, pedagogy, and public interest in this important area of cultural activity.
         The original collection of artifacts was assembled by Alan Cole over a period of several
decades and consists of upwards of 80,000 individual artifacts. The collection also contains
reference materials to the history of writing and has special clusters of items around areas of
interest to the original collector, such as writings and autographical materials by individual
authors. A full index of these materials is not available at this time.


                                               64
National Hangeul Museum (2014), Korea
Seoul, Korea

www.hangeul.go.kr
139, Seobinggo-ro, Yongsan-gu, Seoul 04383
Phone +82 2 2124 6200



In 2009, a report was presented to the President og Korea on “Constructing National Hangeul
Museum as a National Symbol”. Five years later, it was opened on the annual Hangeul day
with several comprehensive collections. In 2017, the number of visitors reached 600,000.
        The National Hangeul Museum showcases the history and value of Korean
orthography, Korean’s most-valued cultural asset, through exhibitions, activities, and
education. Occupying over 11,322 m2, the museum has one basement level and three ground
levels, along with an outdoor grass field and resting area perfect for cultural events, exhibits,
and education.
        The museum is comprised of the Hangeul library on the first floor, a permanent
exhibition hall and cafe and cultural product shop on the second floor, and a planned exhibition
hall and a Hangeul playground for children and foreigners on the third floor.
        The permanent exhibition hall presents “Footprints of Hangeul” – the history and the
globalization of Hangeul, a special exhibition hall covers diverse and compelling topics relating
to Hangeul and other linguistic characters of the world, a Hangeul activity hall offers an array
of fun hands-on activities to help children learn the fundamentals of Hangeul and express
themselves through Hangeul. There is also a learning center for people from all countries and
different cultureswho want to learn Korean.




                                               65
National Museum of Chinese Writing (2009), China
Anyang, Henan, China

www.wzbwg.com/english/
National Museum of Chinese Writing, Mr. Zhang Xuliang, 188# Haiyantang Rd., Jiaxing
Phone +86 0573 82534309



National Museum of Chinese Writing is a state-level museum constructed upon the approval of
the State Council for preserving, showcasing and studying the cultural relics. November 16,
2009 witnessed the grand opening ceremony of the museum.
        Phase I, with a building area of 22,700 square meters and gross investment of 398 million
yuan, consists of a main hall, a square and a Character Archway, mainly for cultural collection
and presentation. Phase II, with a building area of 32,000 square meters and a budgetary
investment of 320 million yuan, mainly consists of a Scientific Research Center, a Science
Popularization and Exchange Center, the world most authoritative language, information and
data center, a Hall for Learning Oracle-Bone Inscriptions, the Character Culture Show and
Exhibition Center and culture and art parks including the “Sea of Learning” and the “Mountain
of Characters”, focusing on academic exchanges and scientific researches.
         Character Archway, an icon building of the museum, will catch your eyes immediately
upon access into the museum. This is one of the important building modes in ancient China. As
a scenic landmark, it is a typical symbol of Chinese culture. The Character Archway, measuring
18.8m in height and 10m in width, is presented in the shape of “字 (zi, meaning character)” in
the style of inscriptions on bones and bronzes and decorated with the Taotie (a mythical
ferocious animal in ancient China) pattern, showing a primitive and solemn pose to harmonize
itself with the overall architectural style of the museum as an indicative symbol of the museum.
On both sides of the archway stands a cooper-made golden phoenix. The sculptures borrow the
familiar phoenix patterns in bronze ware of the Shang and Zhou dynasties.
        The building both implies the connotation of Chinese character culture and highlights
the critical position of character throughout the great civilization history of China. The brilliant
appearance of the main hall unites itself with the picturesque surroundings, showcasing a great
harmony between culture and nature.



                                                66
Sydney Museum of Words (2013), Australia
Sydney, Australia

www.sydneymuseumofwords.org
info@sydneymuseumofwords.org
29 Challis Ave, Potts Point, Sydney



Curator of the Museum, Charles Firth (“The Chaser”), says the new museum is a “wold first”,
generously supported by the City of Sydney’s cultural grants program, in conjunction with the
Sydney Writers’ Room.
         The Museum will feature words mounted and hung around the rooms, in a museum-
style format.
         Charles Firth said: “The idea is to encourage people to spend time reflecting on words
outside of their every day use. We’re taking words out of their normal context.”
         “The exhibition will provide locals and tourists a collection of only the best words that
Australia – and Sydney – has to offer,”
         “We will be showcasing words on loan from some of the great names of our generation."
         The Museum also includes an audio tour, which describes each word’s etymology, and
tells the story of its significance to Australia. “It’s a great for a day out with the kids. Who
knows, they might even learn something about the Australian language?”




                                                67
The Word (2016), England
South Shields, England

https://theworduk.org
enquiries@theword.org.uk
The Word, 45 Market Place, South Shields, NE33 1JF, England
Phone +44 191 427 1818



The Word is a national centre for the written word on 4115 m2 downtown South Shields. The
building is brimming with experiences, activities and facilities for people of all ages to engage
and enjoy, from a digital media wall and FabLab to an immersive storytelling experience and
interactive touch-tables. The library offers 70,000 books, and in nits com prehensive programme
of events the center offers topics as lost dialects.
         The architectural idea for the façade is likened to fanning out the pages in a book with
the entrance overlooking the Market Place being book-ended by two vertical spine walls. The
entrance to The Word opens up into a triple height atrium. There is a large exhibition space and
display pod hosting a rolling programme of exhibitions.
         At its core The Word will celebrate the written word in all its forms through a rolling
programme of events, exhibitions and workshops. Look out for wooden pages of a book that
form a trail around The Word. These are a collection of stories known as Tyne Voyages by
Michael Chaplin. StoryWorld is a magical world of fun, fantasy and adventure. Through an
immersive storytelling experience incorporating stunning backdrop projections and sound
effects, families and children will be able to lose themselves in the depths of a jungle, under the
sea or in outer space.




                                                68
Verbum – Casa das Palabras (2003), Spain
Verbum – House of Words
Vigo, Spain

www.verbum.vigo.org
verbum@vigo.org
Avenida de Samil, 17, 36212 Vigo
Phone + 33 986 240 130



Verbum – Casa das Palabras (House of Words) was opened in April 2003 and is located on the
sea front opposite Samil beach in Vigo, Galicia. The total built area is more than 5,000 m² on
four levels, structured around a great light box through which the sunlight shines on the
different indoor spaces during the day.
        Verbum is an interactive museum and cultural space related to all human
communication through the different aspects that define it: science, technology, language and
communication and literature. The museum is presented in Galician and Spanish.
        The permanent exhibition is the central component of Verbum. It is based on 29 wooden
cubes placed randomly around the room, as if dices had been thrown. Each cube is identified
by a letter, and the whole set covers all aspects related to words in the broadest sense: from the
physiology of communication (mouth, vocalisation, hearing, how we speak and how we listen)
to the media. During the tour, visitors will be able to discover the history and different kinds of
communication, the origins and evolution of writing, the world of words and languages, word
games (palindromes, tongue twisters), the history of books, etc.




                                                69
70
               Museums
     in memory of persons




71
72
Daniel Sanders Haus (2011), Germany
Neustrelitz, Germany

www.lese-ferienwohnung.de/index.html
danielsandershaus@web.de
Müritz Literatur- & Märchenkreis e. V., Sievertstraße 2, D-17235 Neustrelitz (Strelitz Alt)
Phone +49 3981 200547



Häuser für die deutsche Sprache sollen Anlaufstellen für Sprachpflege bieten. Vor einigen
Jahren kam der Wunsch nach einem „Haus der deutschen Sprache“ auf. Verschiedene
Sprachverbände haben sich diesen Traum zu eigen gemacht. Gegenwärtig gibt es neben dem
Daniel Sanders Haus in Köthen /Anhalt (die Neue Fruchtbringend Gesellschaft) ein solches
Haus.
        Den inhaltlichen Mittelpunkt unseres Hauses soll die aktuelle Verwendbarkeit Daniel
Sanders Werke für den heutigen interessierten Sprachteilhaber bilden. Es geht, als Erben
Sanders, um Beiträge zu Problemen der Lexikographie und Sprachpraxis. Im Mittelpunkt steht
das Wort als wichtiges Element der Sprache, aber auch der Gedanke, aus einer ehemaligen
Sanders Stiftung (1914–1954) Erholungsbedürftigen ein "Hüsung" zu geben (in unserer Lese
Ferienwohnung). Das ehemalige Grundstück Sanders (bis 1954 Stiftung) in Alt Strelitz steht
dafür nicht mehr zur Verfügung.
        Das Projekt ist Name mit Programm. Mit dem museums-pädagogischen
Begleitprogramm soll besonders bei der Arbeit mit Schülerinnen und Schülern ein Beitrag zu
ihrer historischen und politischen Bildung geleistet werden. Am „außerschulischen Lern Ort“
soll in Zusammenarbeit mit den Schulen und unter Beachtung curricularer Elemente bei den
Jugendlichen Interesse für Geschichte, im konkreten Fall für die deutsche Sprache und ihre
Entwicklung geweckt werden.
        Ziel ist die Entwicklung von Schlüsselqualifikationen und fachbezogenen Kompetenzen,
aber auch von Begeisterungsfähigkeit für das Originalexponat und seine Aussagekraft. Als Ort
der Begegnung, der Inspiration und des Austausches zwischen Menschen verschiedener
Herkunft und Kultur soll das Sanders Haus Symbol werden für Weltoffenheit und kulturelle
Vielfalt, für Gestaltungsfreiheit und gesellschaftliche Transparenz.




                                                73
Dr. Johnson’s House (1911), England
London, England

www.drjohnsonshouse.org
celine@drjohnsonshouse.org
Dr Johnson's House, 17 Gough Square, London, EC4A 3DE
Phone +44 020 7353 3745



Dr Johnson's House is a charming 300-year-old townhouse, nestled amongst a maze of courts
and alleys in the historic City of London. Samuel Johnson, the writer and wit, lived and worked
here in the middle of the eighteenth century, compiling his great Dictionary of the English
Language in the Garret.
        Today, the House is open to the public with a collection relating to Johnson, a research
library, restored interiors and a wealth of original features. Often described by visitors as a
hidden gem, 17 Gough Square is a tranquil spot in the midst of the bustling City.
        Dr Johnson’s House was built at the end of the seventeenth century by a City wool
merchant, Richard Gough. The timber-framed, brick townhouse, was part of a development in
Gough Square, of which Dr Johnson’s House at number 17 is the only one to survive.
        The four-storey building has retained many of its period features, which include historic
panelling, a fine open staircase, wooden floorboards, a quirky cellarette cupboard, coal holes
and even the original door handles. The eighteenth-century front door still has its historic anti-
burglary devices intact, including a heavy chain with corkscrew latch and spiked iron bar over
the fanlight. Visitors can enter all the rooms in the House and sit down on the chairs and
window seats to soak up the atmosphere.
        Dr Johnson was a tenant at 17 Gough Square, and following his departure in 1759, the
house went through a variety of different uses. It had other lodgers, was used as a small hotel
and bed and breakfast and was even a printers’ workshop and studio. By 1911 it had fallen into
a sad state of disrepair, with water leaking through the roof. At this point it was saved and
restored by Cecil Harmsworth, a Liberal MP.




                                                74
House Museum of Neofit Rilski (1981), Bulgaria
Bansko, Bulgaria

www.bansko.bg
mk_bansko@mail.bg
Neofit Rilski House Museum, 17 Pirin Str., BG-Bansko
Phone +359 749 88272



The House Museum of Neofit Rilski (1793–1881), the founder of secular education in Bulgaria
and the first Bulgarian encyclopaedist, is situated next to the Holy Trinity Church in Bansko.
The building is also known as Beninata kashta (Benin’s House) and was constructed in the 18th
century.
         Benin’s House is located in a large yard surrounded by stone walls and a solid wooden
gate. The building is a typical representative of the Bansko fortified houses. It was declared a
monument of architecture and construction by virtue of publication in State Gazette, issue No
87 of 1967. The ground floor of the house consists of a hiding place, knead-room and farm
premises, while the living-room, the monastery school, and the anteroom are on the second
floor. A huge veranda connects the house with the former farm buildings by an outside terrace.
         Today an exhibition including chronologically-arranged materials that give account of
the life-long work of Neofit Rilski can be seen at the house. A special place among exhibits is
given to Bulgarian Grammar compiled in 1835, parts of a Greek-Bulgarian dictionary, and
books that belonged to Neofit Rilski.
         The Neofit Rilski House Museum was opened in May 1981 at the 100th anniversary
since the death of Neofit Rilski. The house was managed by relatives of Neofit Rilski until its
official opening as a permanent museum exhibition.
Ján Kollár Museum (1983), Slovakia
Mošovce, Slovakia

http://www.muzeum.sk/?obj=muzeum&ix=mjk
info@muzeum.sk
Municipal Office, SLO-038 21 Mosovce
Phone +421 43 49 44 244 or 43 494 41 00 or 43 494 43 32


John Kollar Museum in Mosovce is the original place where stood the birthplace of Jan Kollar.
         When municipal fire, in 1863, residential part of birthplace and the economic part
burned. preserved only granary, which since 1983 has served as a memorial room. In 2009,
began with the construction completion birth house of Jan Kollar, which would be a replica of
the original house.
         In August 2010, a new section opened to public exposure. Museum exhibition was
created with the help of the Municipal Office in Mosovce and literary Slovak National Museum
in Martin. Scriptwriter and curator of the museum exposition is Mgr. Joseph Beňovský.
         Entry to the exhibition begins in the original granary, where visitors can see what this
space has been used in the past (storage crops - cereals, vegetables and fruits, but also served as
a granary storage space for muteľnicu, wooden šechtáre etc.)
         This leads to the next section where the right small kitchen installed by contemporary
drawings of the native house of John Kollar from John Bibzu st. On the left side there is a panel
of life captured John Kollar from birth, studies to priestly work in the German lobed.
         Another room depicts the creation of John Kollar from the first edition of poems by John
Kollar, daughter of Fame in 1824 and the 1832 edition of National spievaniek, Labour literary
reciprocity to kázňovú formation. Panel portion concludes action Kollár in Budapest in the
years 1819–1849.
         The last room is on the panels reflect the most recent period Jan Kollar life in Vienna, his
death, burial and the remains to Prague in 1904. From 1863, here are photos of a visit to the
great-granddaughter of John Kollar Mosovce the unveiling of a statue of Jan Kollar by Fran
Štefunku the square in Mosovce.



                                                 76
Konrad-Duden-Museum (1999), Germany
Bad Hersfeld, Germany

www.nordhessen.de/de/konrad-duden-museum
touristikinfo@bad-hersfeld.de
Konrad-Duden-Museum, Neumarkt 39, D-36251 Bad Hersfeld
Phone +49 6621759 32



Das Konrad-Duden-Museum informiert über das Leben und Wirken des Erfinders des
bekannten Rechtschreibbuches, Dr. Konrad Duden (1829–1911). Von 1876 bis 1905 lebte er als
Direktor des königlichen Gymnasiums in Bad Hersfeld, der heutigen Konrad-Duden-Schule. In
dieser Zeit erschien erstmals 1888 sein Vollständiges orthographisches Wörterbuch der deutschen
Sprache, ein Vorläufer des heutigen Duden.
        Sein ehemaliges Wohnhaus steht in Bad Hersfeld und bietet Einblicke in sein Leben.
        Er unterrichtete über 30 Jahre und setzte sich sein Leben lang für die Vereinheitlichung
der Deutschen Rechtschreibung ein.
        Bereits 1872 war sein Buch Die deutsche Rechtschreibung, Abhandlung, Regeln und
Wörterverzeichnis für die oberen Klasse der höheren Lehranstalten und zur Selbstbelehrung für Gebildete
erschienen. Das Orientierungs- und Nachschlagebuch wurde immer wieder überarbeitet und
erlebte schon zu Dudens Zeit neun Auflagen.
        Konrad Duden starb 1911 in Wiesbaden-Sonnenberg, ist aber auf dem Bad Hersfelder
Hauptfriedhof beerdigt.
        In seinem ehemaligen Wohnhaus am Neumarkt 31 neben der Alten Klosterschule
wurde 1999 ein Konrad-Duden-Museum eröffnet, das an Leben und Werk Dudens erinnert.


                                                  77
Ljudevit Gaj Museum (1966), Croatia
Muzej Ljudevita Gaja
Krapina, Croatia

www.krapina.net/muzej_ljudevita_gaja.asp
galerija@krapina.net
Ljudevita Gaja 14, 49 000 Krapina
Phone +385 49 370 810



Ljudevit Gaj created the grounds for the Croatian language 150 years ago. Up to then, the
literary language of the Croatian people had been Latin, German, Hungarian or the dialect
spoken in a particular area.
        Ljudevit Gaj was born in Krapina, and from a very young age he listened to the
language of the people. He was a thinker in the Enlightenment vain in the most literal meaning
of the word. In line with his efforts, libraries and reading rooms were opened in many towns,
books were printed, and theatre plays performed. He became one of the front figures in the
Croatian nationalist movement from the 1830s. With the works of the Serb Vuk Stefanović
Karadžić as the basic construction, Gaj wanted to develop a written language unifying the Serbs
and the Croats.
        Today, the house in which Ljudevit Gaj was born, which still stands in Ljudevit Gaj
Street, houses a Memorial Museum. The museum displays paintings, pictures of Gaius and his
family, copies of manuscripts and anything that his work was published in. There is a nearby
statue dedicated to him.


                                              78
Ľudovít Štúr Museum (1965), Slovakia
Múzeum Ľudovíta Štúra Modra
Modra, Slovakia

www.snm.sk
mls@snm.sk
PhDr. Viera Jančovičová, Štúrova 84, 900 01 Modra
Phone +421 033 647 27 65 or 090 571 92 73



Ľudovít Štúr was an exceptional personality in the Slovak national history. He became an
initiator and a driving force of the birth of the modern Slovak nation in the mid 19th century.
He had chosen the awakening of the national, political and spiritual life of the Slovaks and their
step forward towards national independence as his mission. Prior to that, however, there was a
need to rescue the nation and achieve its recognition within Hungary and the Habsburg
monarchy. The standard language was a strong evidence of the national independence of the
Slovaks. In his linguistic works Štúr had justified and elaborated it.
         Ľudovít Štúr Museum in Modra is a part of the Slovak National Museum. It is located in
the centre of the town of Modra in the house, where Ľudovít Štúr died. This building houses
the main exhibition called Ľudovít Štúr and modern Slovakia that gives its visitors an overview
of the life and works of Ľudovít Štúr with respect to the historical context. Testimonials from
Ľudovít Štúr's contemporaries present him from the personal angle, while the current views of
experts are not omitted, either.
         Ľudovít Štúr's commemorative room marks the last years of his life in Modra and the
circumstances surrounding his tragic death.




                                                79
Museum of Vuk and Dositej (1949), Serbia
Belgrade, Serbia

www.narodnimuzej.rs/
vukidositej@narodnimuzej.rs
Gospodar Jevremova, 21, RE-Belgrade 11000, Serbia



The Museum of Vuk and Dositej is a memorial museum dedicated to two great personas of
Serbian culture: Dositej Obradović, the member of the Enlightenment Movement and first
Serbian Minister of Education, and Vuk Stefanović Karadžić, the reformer of Serbian language
and creator of Serbian literary language.
        The older and richer Vuk’s collection was formed at the end of the 19th century when
his daughter, Mina Karadžić-Vukomanović donated his legacy to the Kingdom of Serbia. This
collection was the first collection of the National Museum to receive a holistic catalogue,
Description of objects from Legacy of Vuk Stefanović Karadžić, written by Mihajlo Valtrović in
1900. Vuk’s legacy was first exhibited at the National Museum as a part of the Memorial Room
of Vuk and later as a part of the Department of History at the museum. A part of Vuk’s legacy,
especially the furniture, went missing or was destroyed during the Austrian occupation of
Belgrade in the World War I. Today the Collection holds personal and family belongings of Vuk
Karadžić, portraits and art legacy, first editions of his books and numerous archival documents.
        Unlike the legacy of Vuk, the legacy of Dositej Obradović does not include personal
belongings since they were destroyed in a fire in 1813. Therefore, the part of the Museum
collection that relates to Dositej consists of paintings, archival documents, Dositej’s
correspondence and books that include first editions of his works.
        In 1949 Vuk’s collection has been separated from the National Museum collection and
joined the small legacy of Dositej Obradović. On February 28, 1949 Museum of Vuk and Dositej
was formed and opened. It was given a building that for a while hosted the Higher School
where Vuk was one of the first twenty students and Dositej one of its founders. The Museum of
Vuk and Dositej became a part of the National Museum in 1979. Along with the rich exhibition
activity, the museum hosts scientific and research activities that are in connection to Vuk and
Dositej and the period they lived in. Since 1958 the Museum publishes its yearly Little Treasure
Chest (Kovčežić) with materials and scientific studies that are the result of the scientific and
research work of the museum.

                                               80
Native House of Ľudovít Štúr and Alexander Dubček (1965),
Slovakia
Rodný dom Ľudovíta Štúra a Alexandra Dubčeka
Uhrovec, Slovakia

www.muzeumtn.sk
info@muzeumtn.sk
Rodný dom Ľudovíta Štúra a Alexandra Dubčeka, 956 41 Uhrovec, Slovakia
Phone +038 769 42 47



Uhrovec is situated among the mountains in the north-east part of "Nitran Hill-country". In
1295, Uhrovec was a part of the castle estate that consisted of nineteen villages. Uhrovec Castle,
whose ruins overtower the village Uhrovské Podhradie, was built in the first half of the 13 th
century. The first written reference of the castle comes from 1258.
        The birthplace of Ľudovít Štúr and Alexander Dubček was originally a Hungarian
school with a teacher’s residence and was announced as a national cultural heritage. First
exposition was opened here in 1965 on the 150th anniversary of one of the most important
figures in the history of the nation Ľudovít Štúr. The exposition captures the real destiny, works
and messages of Ľudovít Štúr – thinker politician and cofounder of the official Slovak language.
The outstanding European politician Alexander Dubček was born in the same house in 1921.
After reconstruction of the house in November of 1995 a larger exhibition was opened to the
public - memorial room of Alexander Dubček, capturing important milestones of his life.
        The museum is a part of Trenčianske múzeum v Trenčíne, The Museum of Trencin.


                                                81
Noah Webster House (1966), USA
West Hartford, Connecticut, USA

www.noahwebsterhouse.org
comments@noahwebsterhouse.org
Noah Webster House 227 South Main St. West Hartford, CT 06107
Phone +1 860 521 5362



The Noah Webster House & West Hartford Historical Society is located in the restored 18th-
century birthplace and childhood home of Noah Webster, the creator of the first American
dictionary and “Blue-Backed Speller”, a teacher, lawyer and early abolitionist. The home was
restored by the Noah Webster Foundation, a private organization, and opened to the public as a
museum in the late 1960s.
        In 1970, the West Hartford Historical Society merged with the Foundation. Today, the
museum building includes the historic house, the Jodik Education Center with a working
reproduction open hearth, two exhibition galleries, a newly renovated Visitor Reception Center,
and the Hamilton Gallery. The center includes a museum shop, a one-room schoolhouse
theater, and a long-term exhibit on Noah Webster. The museum holdings also include a diverse
collection of decorative arts, manuscripts, books, and ephemeral artifacts related to Noah
Webster as well as to the local community.
        Each year the Noah Webster House serves approximately 10,000 school children and
thousands of general visitors from around the world. An important part of our school services
is the many free-of-charge experiences that we offer to at-risk children. The Noah Webster
House also provides numerous workshops, summer camps, and a history club for young
people.
        The museum also offers a broad range of family and adult programs. These include our
Kids' First Saturday program which makes the museum a destination for families on the first
Saturday of each month, with topics ranging from New England folklore to historic games and
music. For an adult audience we provide lectures, book discussions, popular Tavern Nights
(raucous evenings with food, drink, folk music, and colonial games), hearth-cooking classes,
and our thrilling Halloween program West Hartford Hauntings.

                                              82
Primož Trubar House (1986), Slovenia
Velike Lašče, Slovenia

www.trubarjevi-kraji.si
info@trubarjevi-kraji.si
Javni zavod Trubarjevi kraji, Rašica 1315 Velike Lašče
Phone +386 1 788 10 06 or 41 905 513



Am Bach unterhalb des Ortes Rašica steht die so genannte Temkov-Mühle (Rašica 31) an einem
Ort, wo zuvor das Geburtshaus von Primož Trubar (9.6.1508–28.6.1586) gestanden haben soll.
Trubar, protestantischer Reformator und Prediger, hat mit seinen Werken "Abecedarium" und
"Katechismus" die Grundsteine für die slowenische Schriftsprache gelegt.
        Das Dorf und die alte Mühle sollen 1528 von den Türken niedergebrannt worden sein.
Die Temkov-Mühle wurde wiederaufgebaut und erhielt im 19. Jahrhundert ihr heutiges
Aussehen. Die Mühlräder drehen sich zwar, der Innenbereich ist jedoch nicht vollständig
saniert. An der Mühle stehen ein großes Wirtschaftsgebäude und eine Säge, die bis 1965 in
Betrieb war.
        Anlässlich des 400. Todestages von Primož Trubar wurde im sanierten Obergeschoss
der Temkov-Mühle eine Gedenkausstellung eingerichtet. Gezeigt werden der Lebensweg von
Primož Trubar, sein Werk und mehrere Gemälde verschiedener Künstler, die Trubar gemalt
haben. Die Wirtschaftsgebäude beherbergt einen kleineren Imbiss und eine lokale Galerie.
        Im Dorf, unweit der Mühle, wurde 1952, anlässlich des 400. Jahrestages der ersten
slowenischen Druckerei, ein Trubar-Denkmal enthüllt. Das Denkmal besteht aus einem
pyramidenförmigen Körper auf einem Sockel und ist mit Reliefs geschmückt (Architekt Vinko
Glanz, Bildhauer Vlado Stoviček).


                                               83
84
                 Digital
museums and information




85
86
Digital museums

Antalya Dil Muzesi
A language museum in Antalya on Facebook
https://www.facebook.com/Antalya-Dil-Muzesi-Ingilizce-Ispanyolca-Rusca-Japonca-Arapca-
Turkish-192076150873752/
alexantalya@gmail.com
Phone: 0537 665 6107

Beijing Language and Culture Digital Museum, Beijing, China
By the end of 2016, Beijing Language and Culture Digital Museum was supposed to open,
developed by Beijing Language Network at Beijing Language and Culture University. Updated
information of 31 January 2018 confirmed this.
http://www.138490.xyz/viewnews-1391395.html

Bibliotheek met digital Taalmuseum Tesi Samanunga, Bilzen, Belgium
http://bilzen.bibliotheek.be
bibliotheek@bilzen.be
The Dutch language seems to have emerged in Bilzen. The oldest known books in Dutch
language, such as Wachtendonkse Psalmen (10th century) and the poem “Tesi samanunga was
edele unde scona” (1130) are associated with places in this region. Taalmuseum «Tesi
Samanunga» was opened in the townhall of Bilzen in 2000. It was closed some years ago and
turned into adigital museum in the library of Bilzen.

Digitale bibliotheek voor de Nederlandse letteren
http://www.dbnl.org
The digital library of the Dutch Language is a website on the Dutch language, literature and
cultural history. On this site, one can find literary texts, secondary literature and additional
information, like biographies, portraits and hyperlink alongside primary sources on the Dutch
cultural history. The Digital Library was established back in 1999.

Haus der deutschen Sprache
www.hausderdeutschensprache.eu
Planned as an ambitious language museum in Berlin several years ago, Haus der deutschen
Sprache became a virtual museum with information about language and literature in German,
and the diversity of languages, also presenting the poem of the month.

Language Museum
www.languagesmuseum.com
The Language Museum is a linguistic website which offers the samples of 2000 languages in the
world. It gives insight into the relationships between different languages and shows that it is
not hard to learn another language if you already know a related one. The website was inspired
by the book The Loom of Language, which was written by the linguist Frederick Bodmer in 1944.
The museum is constructed and maintained by Zhang Hong, now in Bellevue, Western Austria.


                                               87
Lingo
www.languagewriter.com
The Dutch language writer Gaston Dorren has produced the app Language Lover’s Guide to
Europe and published several books on language, such asTaaltoerisme. Feiten en verhalen over 53
Europese talen (2012), with the revised English edition Lingo. A language spotter’s guide to Europe
(2014). His web site includes vivid and well-informed blogs in English and Dutch on language.

LingvoInfo
http://lingvo.info
This multilingval website about the languages of Europe consists of the parts: Lingvopedia the
languages in short), Babylon (general information about linguistics), Lingvopolis (links) and
GeoLingvom (game). 28 of the European languages are presented in many ways in 19 different
languages. The project is based on “Lingva prismo” which was launched in 2003, and the old
website may be reached at http://old.lingvo.info.

Musée de Parole la en Ardenne
www.museedelaparole.be/fr/accueil.html
The museum was founded in Bastogne in 1982 and is for years a virtual museum. It aims to
collect linguistic data of spoken Walloon in Ardennes, also covering Luxembourg. It is available
on Internet, and a multimedia document collection is presented at Michel Francard Museum
and the Word in the Ardennes at the Library of Bastogne.

Museo Virtual de la Lengua Zapoteca
http://museo-zapoteco.orgfree.com
A virtual museum of the zapotec language, not updated since 2014.

SprachRaum virtuell
http://www.sprachraum.de / info@sprachraum.de
A virtual language museum of the southwest German dialects, especially of the Baden-
Frankonian language.

Sprogmuseet / The Language Museum
http://sprogmuseet.dk/
A blog on language, written and edited by Ole Stig Andersen in Danish since 2009. The blog
was a part of the preparing work for a planned language museum in Denmark. From 2015 it
has been limited to a news feed about language.

Turkish Language Foundation / Türk Dil Kurumu
http://yazmalar.tdk.org.tr/
Digital collection of handwritten documents going back very far in history and in many
languages. Visitors may click on the tab “Katalog Tarama” (Catalogue Search), click on the
language they wish to see and then on catalogue entries for handwritten documents in that
language, and then download and view high-quality digital images of the documents.
In 2011, plans for a language museum were announced, which has not been established

Virtual museum of the indigenous languages of Mexico
http://www-01.sil.org/MEXICO/museo/0i-Index.htm

                                                 88
There are over 150 important variants of the indigenous languages spoken in Mexico today.
This virtual museum introduces these languages and the people who speak them.

Wortmuseum (2004), Germany
www.wortmuseum.de
Das Wort und die Sprache sind prägend für Kultur, für Identität. Im Wortmuseum wird jede
Woche ein Wort in der „Ausstellung“ zu sehen sein. Die Bedeutung wird jeweils dazugestellt.
Nach Ablauf einer Woche kommt es in die „Sammlung“ und kann dort weiterhin eingesehen
werden.




                                             89
Websites

A world of languages
www.scmp.com/infographics/article/1810040/infographic-world-languages
www.lucasinfografia.com/Mother-tongues
For the newspaper South China Morning Post, Alberto Lucas López made an infographic that
compares the number of people (all together 4.1 billion) that speak the top 23 languages in the
world as their primary language, based on information from Ethnologue 2015: “We represent
each language within black borders and then provide the numbers of native speakers (in
millions) by country. The colour of these countries shows how languages have taken root in
many different regions.”

Ethnologue
www.ethnologue.com
An encyclopaedic reference work cataloguing all of the world’s 7,097 known living languages
(updated 2018). This is a main source for most of the websites about languages in the world.
Since 1951, Summer Institute of Linguistics in Dallas, Texas, USA has published language
documentation connected with Bible translations. No other research institute disposes more
knowledge about the language situation in the world.
        The 17th edition, the last one in print, was presented in four volumes 1 November 2014.
The 21 edition on-line was published in February 2018.
       th




About World Languages
http://aboutworldlanguages.com/
The site provides a wide variety of information about world languages. To get started, select
from the drop-down menu to the right or simply explore the website. It is well edited and
updated, with an interesting feature “Did you know?” which gives the readers some surprises.
        In 2005 as part of America’s celebration of the Year of Languages, The Technology
Development Group initiated the development of a comprehensive website dedicated to the
description of the world’s most populous and important languages as well as other relevant
information about world languages and language study. The project was intended to be part of
an effort to educate the American public about the variety of the world’s languages, to get them
excited about studying foreign languages, and to ultimately help create a more language-
capable America ready to meet its pressing foreign language needs. Since then, the Technology
Development Group team has continued to work diligently on the development of the website.

Langscape
http://langscape.umd.edu
Langscape is a gateway to language diversity. It is a resource that allow users with a wide array
of interests, from recreational to academic, to discover the world’s languages via interactive
tools and access to established research. The centerpiece of Langscape is an interactive map that
lets users click on any geographic location to see the languages spoken there. Selecting a
language allows users to access a growing variety of resources for that language, thanks to the
efforts of our partners and others in a range of fields and specialties. Langscape has been a
project of the Maryland Language Science Center since January 2014.

                                               90
Language Facts / Språkfakta 2015
http://www.aasentunet.no/iaa/no/sprakfakta_2015/
The 4th and most comprehensive edition of language data from Norway was published in
September 2015 as a story about language in Norway and the world by 867 tables. Written in
Norwegian, it is only published online. The former editions from 1998, 2005 and 2010 contain
652 tables and charts, which probably makes Norwegian Bokmål and Nynorsk the best
statistically documented languages in the world. An updated English summary was planned
for 2018 and the 5th edition for 2020.

CIA World Handbook: Languages
https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/fields/2098.html
This entry provides a rank for each country ordering of languages starting with the largest and
sometimes includes the percent of total population speaking that language, partly up-to-date.

Endangered Languages
www.yourdictionary.com/elr/index.html
This section of YourDictionary.com highlights world-wide efforts to slow the loss of
endangered languages, e.g. the world’s living languages by country. UNESCO Red Book of
Endangered Languages is a main source.

Forvo
http://www.forvo.com/
This is the largest pronunciation guide in the world. Ever wondered how a word is
pronounced? Ask for that word or name, and another user will pronounce it for you. You can
also help others by recording your pronunciations in your own language. This service is
available in many languages.

Freelang – Language families
www.freelang.net/families
A nice and well edited selection of tables and maps, mostly updated, developed since 1997.
Information about sources is scarce.

Geographic language museum
http://www.foreignlanguageexpertise.com/museum2.html
On this page you can listen to 20-25 hours of clear textual recordings in 528 languages
organized geographically so that you can compare the sounds of the languages spoken in a
particular region of the world. Many if not most of the languages presented here are
endangered and have little or no other documentation. Thus, these recordings of a
comprehensible text can serve as a resource to study them as well as to document their
existence in the event of their extinction. Last updated 2011.

Internet World Stats: Usage and Population Statistics
www.internetworldstats.com/stats7.htm
Statistics updated systematically for years.

L'aménagement linguistique dans le monde
www.tlfq.ulaval.ca/axl

                                               91
These pages written by Jacques Leclerc present the specific language situations and policies in
355 states or autonomous territories in the 194 (recognized) countries of the world. It is a
comprehensive website with presentation of many languages, developed at Université Laval
Québec since 2007.

Language Statistics by country
www.nationmaster.com/cat/lan-language
Nation Master presents statistics in tables, charts and maps for choes languages. There is no
information of sources or of year of information.

Languages of the World
http://languagesoftheworld.info/
Exploring the diversity of human languages, this site is a discussion forum dedicated to
exploring the rich diversity of human languages and the peoples who speak them. Comments
and criticism from informed readers are always welcome, but this is not a forum for venting
political or ideological frustrations. The website is written and edited by Asya Pereltsvaig, who
has published Languages Of The World: An Introduction (2012).

Linguist List
http://linguistlist.org/
The LINGUIST List is a large collection of information about language and linguistics. It is
dedicated to providing information on language and language analysis, and to providing the
discipline of linguistics with the infrastructure necessary to function in the digital world. The
LINGUIST List is operated by the Institute for Language Information and Technology (ILIT) at
Eastern Michigan University.

LL-MAP: Language and Location
http://llmap.org/
LL-MAP is a digital mapping project that integrates language data and information from the
physical and social sciences. Users can browse over 700 maps or create and share their own.
LL-MAP is a project designed to integrate language information with data from the physical
and social sciences by means of a Geographical Information System (GIS). The most important
part of the project is a language subsystem, which relates geographical information on the area
in which a language is or has been spoken to data on resources relevant to the language. LL-
MAP is a joint project of Eastern Michigan University and Stockholm University. It is based on
World Language Mapping System, see below.

Omniglot: writing systems & languages of the world
www.omniglot.com
Omniglot is an encyclopaedia of more than 180 writing systems and 840 languages. It also
contains tips on learning languages, language-related articles, quite a large collection of useful
phrases in many languages, multilingual texts, a multilingual book store and an ever-growing
collection of links to language-related resources. Omniglot was set up in 1998 by Simon Ager,
and he has been maintaining and developing the site since then.

Sprachkulturen in Osteuropa
www.forost.lmu.de/forosthope/fo_db_sprachen_box.htm

                                                92
This database on the languages of Eastern Europe is a project supported by the
Forschungsverbund Ost- und Südosteuropa (Research Network Eastern and Southeastern
Europe) based in Munich. The online database is in German and is based on the relevant
articles from the international handbook Sprachkulturen in Europa, published by Nina Janich and
Albrecht Greule in 2002. There are 52 languages and dialects comprised in the database.

Språkförsvaret / Th Language Armed Forces
www.språkförsvaret.se
A web site in Swedish from 2002, building a network to defend and strenghten the Swedish
language.

The archives of the world languages
http://www.chikyukotobamura.org
Website in Japanese.

The Linguistics Research Center
http://www.utexas.edu/cola/centers/lrc/
The Linguistics Research Center (LRC), founded in 1961 at the University of Texas, is an
organized research unit in the College of Liberal Arts. For more information about the LRC,
including staff and associates, publications, current projects, a brief history mentioning past
projects, and contact information including our office address and phone number, see: About
the LRC. This site contains thousands of web pages, most of them devoted to ancient Indo-
European languages and cultures, and the history of these languages.

The Rosetta Project
www.rosettaproject.org
The Rosetta Project is a global collaboration of language specialists and native speakers
working to build a publicly accessible digital library of human languages.
        The Rosetta Disk fits contains over 13,000 pages of information on over 1,500 human
languages. The pages are microscopically etched and then electroformed in solid nickel, a
process that raises the text very slightly – about 100 nanometers – off of the surface of the disk.
Each page is only 400 microns across, about the width of 5 human hairs, and can be read
through a microscope at 650X as clearly as you would from print in a book. Individual pages
are visible at a much lower magnification of 100X. The outer ring of text reads “Languages of
the World” in eight major world languages.

The World Atlas of Language Structures
http://wals.info/
The World Atlas of Language Structures (WALS) is a large database of structural (phonological,
grammatical, lexical) properties of languages gathered from descriptive materials (such as
reference grammars) by a team of 55 authors.
        The first version of WALS was published as a book with CD-ROM in 2005 by Oxford
University Press. The first online version was published in April 2008. The second online
version was published in April 2011. The 2013 edition of WALS corrects a number of coding
errors especially in Chapters 1 and 3.



                                                 93
UCLA Center for World Languages
http://www.international.ucla.edu/cwl
The UCLA Center for World Languages coordinates language research, teaching and
evaluation programs. We develop innovative methods of second language education, advocate
for their implementation and facilitate their transfer into formal classrooms and informal
settings. The UCLA Language Materials Project is an online bibliographic database of teaching
and learning materials for over 100 Less Commonly Taught Languages.

UNESCO Data Centre
www.uis.unesco.org/Pages/default.aspx
Access data and build your own statistical tables related to UNESCO's fields of action. The Data
Centre contains over 1,000 types of indicators and raw data on education, literacy, science and
technology, culture and communication. The UIS collects the data for more than 200 countries
from member states and international organizations.

Wikipedia: List of languages by number of native speakers
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_languages_by_number_of_native_speakers
The tables list languages of the world with the largest number of native speakers, as estimated
in various ways at different times by various sources. Since the definition of a single language is
to some extent arbitrary, some mutually intelligible idioms with separate national standards or
self-identification have been listed together, including Indonesian and Malay; Croatian,
Bosnian, and Serbian; etc. Ethnologue, 19th edition 2016, is the main source.

World Language Mapping System
https://mdl.library.utoronto.ca/collections/geospatial-data/world-language-mapping-system
The World Language Mapping System (WLMS) is the most comprehensive, up-to-date, and
trusted geographic dataset of the point and area (polygon) locations of the world's 6,900
languages (in 2016). The WLMS is the result of over 20 years of collaborative work between
GMI and SIL International (SIL), to map the languages described in SIL's 16th edition
Ethnologue. The data is provided in ESRI shapefile (.shp) format for GIS systems with
substantially all the data from the 16th edition Ethnologue in a .DBF data table for use in further
analysis.




                                                94
International institutions and networks

Council of Europe: Language policy division
www.coe.int/T/DG4/Linguistic/Default_en.asp
The Council of Europe’s activities to promote linguistic diversity and language learning in the
field of education are carried out within the framework of the European Cultural Convention,
(1954) ratified by 49 states.
        The Language Policy Unit (Strasbourg) implements intergovernmental medium-term
programmes with a strong emphasis on activities and tools to support policy development. The
Unit’s programmes are complemented by those of the European Centre for Modern Languages
(ECML - Graz, Austria) with a particular focus on implementation of policy.

European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages
www.coe.int/t/dg4/education/minlang/textcharter/default_en.asp
Among the fundamental aims of the Council of Europe today are the protection and promotion
of the wealth and diversity of Europe’s cultural heritage. Regional or minority languages are
very much part of this heritage.
        The European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages, drawn up on the basis of a
text put forward by the Standing Conference of Local and Regional Authorities of Europe, was
adopted as a convention on 25 June 1992 by the Committee of Ministers of the Council of
Europe, and entered into force on 1 March 1998.

Foundation for Endangered Languages
www.ogmios.org
The Foundation for Endangered Languages supports, enables and assists the documentation,
protection and promotion of endangered languages. The foundation holds an annual
conference, in different locations around the world and with up-to-date themes reflecting the
latest issues affecting the world's endangered languages.

Gesellschaft für bedrohte Sprachen
www.uni-koeln.de/gbs
The Society for Endangered Languages (Gesellschaft für bedrohte Sprachen) was founded in
November 1997 by a group of German linguists together with the members of the “Endangered
Languages” work group of the German Society for Linguistics in Cologne. The goal of this non-
profit organization is to further the use, preservation, and documentation of endangered
languages and dialects.

Girona Manifesto on Linguistic Rights
http://www.pen-international.org/who-we-are/translation-linguistic-rights/girona-manifesto/
Developed by the translation and Linguistic Rights Committee, the Girona Manifesto is a ten
point document designed to be translated and disseminated widely as a tool to defend
linguistic diversity around the world. At PEN International’s 77th annual Congress in Girona 15
September 2011 the PEN General Assembly approved the Manifesto. By 2016, it was translated
into 72 languages.


                                              95
International network of language museums
admin@aasentunet.no
By an initiative from Centre for Norwegian Lanfguage and Lterature in October 2015, 11
museums agreed to establish International network of language museums. The inaugural
meeting was held in Milan, Italy, 3 July 2016, where the museums also approved the platform
for the network (see below).

Linguapax
http://www.linguapax.org/english
Linguapax International is a non-governmental organization dedicated to the appreciation and
protection of linguistic diversity worldwide. Linguapax, created by UNESCO in 1987, is
headquartered in Barcelona since 2001. It has the support of public and private institutions of
Catalonia and operates as an international network. The Linguapax International Network was
officially set up on 21 February 2006 in Barcelona.

Linguasphere Observatory / Observatoire linguistique
http://www.linguasphere.info/lcontao/bienvenue-welcome.html
The Linguasphere Register of the world’s languages and speech communities belongs to the
Observatoire linguistique. This is a largely voluntary transnational research organisation,
created in Quebec in 1983 and subsequently based in Normandy and Wales. The Observatory
completed and published the first fascicules in French in 1993, and its entire Linguasphere
Register in English in December 1999/January 2000. From November 2012, the Observatoire
linguistique launched the first systematic online publication of the entire text of its 1999/2000
Register of the World’s Languages and Speech Communities, including geolinguistic
classification, coding and alphabetic indexing of the world’s languages.

Living tongues
www.livingtongues.org/hotspots.html
The Living Tongues Institute for Endangered Languages is a non-profit organization dedicated
solely to the documentation, maintenance, and revitalization of endangered languages globally.
It develops and manages linguist-aided, community-led projects that promote the use of digital
video, computers, and other modern information technology.

The Hans Rausing Endangered Languages Project
https://www.soas.ac.uk/linguistics/research/research-clusters/documentation-and-description-
of-endangered-languages.html
Endangered Languages Project aims to document endangered languages, train language
documenters, preserve and disseminate documentation materials, and support endangered
languages. It operates from a donation of £20 million from Arcadia and based at SOAS,
University of London.

UNESCO Atlas on endangered languages
http://www.unesco.org/culture/languages-atlas/
UNESCO’s Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger has been published in three editions in
1996, 2001 and 2010. The online edition of the Atlas is complementary to the print edition It
does not reproduce the regional and thematic chapters of the print version, but it offers
additional information on the listed endangered languages.

                                                96
Universal Declaration of Linguistic
www.linguistic-declaration.org
Official web site for the declaration of 1996. June 6–8 1996, the World Conference of Linguistic
Rights was held in Barcelona with the assistance of 66 NGO's, 41 PEN Centres and 41 experts in
linguistic legislations from all over the world. The Assembly of Participants approved the
Universal Declaration of Linguistic Rights by acclamation in the ceremony held the 6 June at the
Paranimph of the University of Barcelona.




                                               97
98
                        Plans
and projects for new museums




    99
100
English Language Museum, England
Winchester, England

www.englishproject.org
info@englishproject.org
The English Project, University of Winchester, Sparkford Road, Winchester, SO22 4NR

The English Project was launched in 2005. The aim is to promote awareness and understanding
of the unfolding global story of the English language in all its varieties past, present and future.
By 2016, it is a vivid web site with much information, and several books have been published.
        The English Project plans to open the world’s first English language museum. We will
do that in Winchester, Hampshire, England, and our aim is to provide a showcase of the
language.
        The mission of such a place should be to explore and explain the English language in
order to educate and entertain the English speaker. That sets some clear parameters. The
museum must be international; it must cover the globe; it must reach into the future; it must
reach back to the past; it must focus on speakers; it must work with sounds; it must be
intellectually first-class; it must amuse people; it must be accessible to all.
        At the moment this place does not exist, but when it does exist, it will be a space where
people can engage with the infinite possibilities of English, gaining a better understanding of its
development and the way it serves its users – whatever their class or ethnic background and
wherever in the world they live. Above all such a place should enable English speakers to gain
a better understanding of their own personal version of English.
        They have the basis of a business plan, a management team, and a growing number of
volunteer supporters.



Eurotales, Italy
Rome, Italy

http://digilab2.let.uniroma1.it/eurotales/?lang=en
eurotales2020@uniroma1.it
Eurotales, Facoltà di Lettere, Piazzale Aldo Moro, 5, I–00185 Roma
Phone +39 06 491919, 06 49913417

Monuments and cities are set confidently in a given space, and they carry a date usually
established with certainty. There are however other, no less fundamental components of our
cultural heritage, such as language and narratives which are harder to pin down. They often
function as justification of a community's existence or claim to independence, and they may be
used to state exclusive rights over a territory at the expenses of others.
        However immaterial cultural heritage happens in a continuum, stretching across time
and space. Its most fundamental component, shared by everyone without exception, with no
discrimination of gender, class, origin or status are languages.
        Europe is made up by this chorus of voices which define identity and are yet the result
of complex processes and identity negotiations which are in constant flux. Common knowledge
goes that each nation has its own language. However, it is not possible to define exclusive

                                                101
boundaries where a language happens. The languages of Europe are dynamically displaced
across the continent. We figure rather easily their position across space. Less easily figured is,
however, their making across time and the overlap between them across both time and space.
        The project, which seeks to reconnect the intangible heritage of language with tangible
objects, consists in 1) an interactive map-based digital platform that will store and sort relevant
data relating to the languages of Europe in time and space 2) themes extracted from these maps
that serve as objects of stable installation in appropriate exhibiting spaces (e.g.Museums,
academies, and cultural heritage sites across Europe) and 3) digital apps guiding potential
visitors along linguistic itineraries connected to specific sites.
        Eventually they expect to interconnect these three ‘tools’ with a single itinerant
exhibiting space that possesses the flexibility to change its content based on geographical
location, a Museum of the Voices of Europe.
        Eurotales also publish Voices in transit: The Eurotales Journal.



Lingnan Language Museum, China
Guangdong, China

The Guangdong authorities announced in September 2017 a plan to build a language museum
People's Daily Online reported. The museum will collect linguistic materials of several dialects
spoken in China’s southeastern provinces, in an effort to tackle the country’s rapidly shrinking
linguistic diversity. The museum is jointly established by Guangdong authorities and a local
language protection center.
        It will will feature dialects spoken in China’s Lingnan Area, which covers Guangdong,
Guangxi, and Hainan provinces. Known for its linguistic diversity, the region is famous for
several dialects that maintain some phonetic and phonological characteristics of ancient classic
Chinese, and it has been hailed by linguists as a treasure chest of linguistic history.
        “Though China has already done a lot in protecting dialects, minority language or
dialect planning remains faintly visible. Most people have given up their non-mandarin
indigenous dialects for social or economic benefits, losing their cultural identity. The museum
has offered the public a linguistic alternative, allowing them to remember their local dialects
while using mandarin as a lingua franca,” said Emily Sun, a linguistic PhD candidate from
Beijing Foreign Studies University.
        “We want to provide a home for the region’s colorful dialects. By promoting the
linguistic value of the languages, we hope to raise awareness of protecting and inheriting
dialects,” added Chen to the newspaper.



National Museum of the Hebrew Language, Israel
Jerusalem, Israel

http://hebrew-academy.huji.ac.il
ivrit@hebrew-academy.org.il




                                                102
A National Museum of Hebrew will be founded in the new campus of the Academy of the
Hebrew Language. In its new seat the Academy will increase and intensify its research activity
in the Historical Dictionary Project and in new research institutes that will be established.
        The Museum will tell the story of the Hebrew language – its history over more than
three thousand years and its amazing revival as a vibrant spoken language today. It will
contain a permanent exhibition as well as temporary exhibits. It will offer innovative design
and will make use of the most advanced technologies. Alongside the museum a Learning and
Cultural Center will offer an array of learning opportunities including a continuing education
program, conferences and seminars. The center will enable the general public to establish a
deeper connection with its language and its culture. It will be possible to combine participation
in the center's activities with a museum visit.
        The Academy of the Hebrew Language's internet site contains a wealth of information
concerning questions of language. This site, together with the internet site of the Historical
Dictionary Project (which presents Hebrew literature throughout the ages), as well as new sites
currently under development, will serve as the largest and most authoritative information
center for Hebrew.
        Eliezer Ben-Yehuda, often called the Father of Modern Hebrew, and other grammarians,
scholars and teachers established in 1889 the Language Committee, which turned into the
Academy of the Hebrew Language soon after the establishment of the State of Israel.
        The furniture and library of Eliezer Ben Yehuda are shown in the Academy of the
Hebrew Language and will be transferred to the museum.
        The Government of Israel's decision of 2012 to promote the status of the Hebrew
Language in Israel and throughout the world and to establish a national center for the Hebrew
language in Jerusalem helps the Academy to strengthen the ties with the lovers of Hebrew.



National Museum of World Writing, Korea
Incheon, Korea

The National Museum of World Writing will exhibit and study data and information on the
characters of the world, meant to become an international hub for writing research and policy
exchange. It will strive to understand the fundamentals of humanity’s culture with writings
related artifacts and various production media. It seeks to become an avenue of rich cultural
activity for understanding and respective cultural diversity.
        The building area counts 15,650 m2, located within Central Park of Songdo International
City, a city built on reclaimed land. Central Park is a park with a vast artificial lake where
citizens frequently visit for relaxation. The museum will not only be a space for professional
exhibition and research, but also a cultural space for the people. Aiming to become a landmark,
the new museum plans on realizing diverse social, cultural, and educational values by
developing and supplying creative cultural contents.
        An international design competition was annonuced in 2017.



Planet Word, USA
Washingtion D.C., USA
https://www.planetwordmuseum.org

                                               103
connect@planetwordmuseum.org

The philanthropist Ann B. Friedman will develop Planet Word as a linguistics museum in the
historic Franklin School building in Washington D.C., “dedicated to akll things linguistics”,
City Lab reported in January 2017. The museum plans to open by winter 2019.
        The museum will take the visitors on an immersive journey that will awaken a love of
language that will last a lifetime. It will show every visitor the fun of words and language
everywhere they look – from the menu in the café to the walls in the bathrooms to the floors
and the stairwells. And by welcoming readers of all ages and at all language levels, including
non-English speakers, Planet Word is meant for everyone.
        Visitors will engage in activities that make words and language exciting with delightful
programming and playful, interactive exhibits. Opportunities for self-expression and intense
listening ensure that no one will leave Planet Word without finding the fun in how we joke,
sing, speak, read, and write every day. Visitors to Planet Word will realize that words really do
matter, and that they can be humankind’s most powerful tools.



Sprach Lust, Austria
Seekirchen, Austria

www.sprachlust.at
info@kunstbox.at
Kulturverein KunstBox, Anton-Windhager-Strasse 7, A-5201 Seekirchen
Phone +43 664 2302196

SprachLust ist das Konzept zur Errichtung eines Erlebnismuseums für Sprache und Dialekt. Im
Fokus dieses Ansinnens steht das zielorientierte Vermitteln von sprachwissenschaftlichen
Themen sowie die Bewusstseinsbildung für regionale Sprache und Dialekte für eine breite
Öffentlichkeit.
        Während es Museen für nahezu alle Themen gibt (naturwissenschaftliche,
völkerkundliche, technische, kunst- und kulturgeschichtliche, historische usw.), ist ein solcher
Ort der Vermittlung für das breite Feld der Sprache noch überfällig. Vielleicht ist eine solche
Idee früher angesichts der Abstraktheit des Mediums Sprache nicht realisiert worden. Heute
aber ist vieles durch aktuelle digitale Techniken sehr gut darstell- und vermittelbar. Das führt
zu einer neuen Ausgangssituation und neuen Chancen.
        Im Februar 2013 wurde dem Kulturverein Kunstbox der Große Preis der
Landesausschreibung „Wahre Landschaft“ für das Konzept einer Vision verliehen.
        Wir benötigen mindestens eine Netto-Nutzfläche von 3500 qm. Die dafür veranschlagte
Investitionssumme beläuft sich auf 26 Mio. Euro, da ist alles inkludiert. Der jährliche Aufwand
wird mit 3,4 Mio. Euro veranschlagt, wobei hier die größte Position die Personalkosten sind -
bei einem errechneten Personalstand von 34 Mitarbeitern.
        Seit Mai 2014 gibt es mehrere Veranstaltungen und Ausstellngen über das Prosjekt, u.a.
in der Stadtbibliothek Salzburg. Im 2018 gab es doch keine neue Information.




                                               104
Vigdís International Centre of Multilingualism
and Intercultural Understanding, Iceland
Vigdísarstofun – alþjóðleg miðstöð tungumála og menningar
Reykjavík, Iceland

http://vigdis.hi.is/vigdis_international_centre_for_multilingualism_and_intercultural_understa
nding
infovigdis@hi.is
Stofnun Vigdísar Finnbogadóttur, Háskóla Íslands, Nýja Garði, IS-101 Reykjavík
Phone +354 525 4191

The Vigdís Finnbogadóttir Institute of Foreign Languages at the University of Iceland aims to
contribute to intercultural understanding between individuals and nations with regards to
language competences, knowledge about other cultures, and translations.
        The Vigdís International Centre of Multilingualism and Intercultural Understanding
will be a research and knowledge centre about language and culture. An agreement between
UNESCO and the Icelandic government was signed in 2013, establishing that the Centre will
work under the auspices of UNESCO. The main objectives of the Centre will be to:
• promote multilingualism in order to further understanding, communication and respect
    between nations and cultures;
• raise awareness of the key role of languages as a basic aspect of the human cultural
    heritage and contribute to the preservation of languages;
• promote translations and translation studies in order to enhance the respect for and
    enjoyment of cultural diversity and intercultural understanding;
• contribute to worldwide monitoring of the implementation of language policies and
    language planning in the field of mother-tongue-based multilingualism;
• promote research and education in foreign language and culture studies;
• support and promote research into the role of the mother tongue as a human right.
        The cornerstone for new building of some 3,000 m2 housing the activities of the Vigdís
Finnbogadóttir Institute and the Vigdís International Centre was laid 19 June 2016, and the
construction was finished in 2017.




                                              105
106
      Beginnings and endings




107
108
Initiatives for new museums

Hezhou University Language Museum, Hezhou, Hunan, China
There have been a lot of theories about construction of a language museum, but practices
mainly go on in other developed countries and regions such as Europe and the United States.
Domestic language museums are mainly based on websites or network digital forms. Hezhou
University has started the construction of a language museum which preserves and exhibits the
living languages, urgently needs an organization to implement.

Museo della lingua italiana, Lecco, Italy
At a meeting in April 2016, Councillor Simona Square in Lecco presented the idea of a museum
fort he Italian language at Villa Manzoni in Lecco, 60 km north of Milan. Former Minister of
Culture, Massimo Bray, suprted the idea: “Manzoni is part of your history, why not build a
museum here in Lecco of the Italian language?”

Museum der deutschen Sprache, Mannheim, Germany
The Institute of German language in Mannheim employs a staff of about 230. In 2014, President
of the institute, Ludwig Eichinger, proposed to develop a museum for the German language in
connection to the institute. Students of architecture in Mannheim were invited to participate in
a competitition for the design of such a museum, and the winners were presented in February
2015. The further development is not known.

Museum for African Languages (Chama Lugha), Dar es Salaam, Tanzania
A student of architecture, Stacey Leader, presented in 2010 a very ambitious and detailed plan
for a language museum. It should be located in the Mnasi Mmoja Park in Dar es Salaam, near
by the Freedom Monument. The museums would cver the languages of Africa. If built, it would
become the largest language museum in the world, 9,300 m2, but the idea is still just an idea.

Museum for the Portuguese language, Bragança, Portugal
In May 2009, the Portuguese government decided to build a museum for the Portuguese
language in Belém, Lisboa. The plan was to open the museum in October 2010, at the 100th
anniversary of the Portuguese republic, but it failed. At a visit to Bragança, the Portuguese
president Marcelo Rebelo de Sousa, announced on 5 July 2016 that he supported the idea of a
museum for the Portuguese language and culture in Bragança. There are already statutes for
the museum, a board of trustees and en executive committee, and a funding of 3.5 million
euros.

Pop-up museum of languages, Cambridge, England
The University of Cambridge has been given a large grant from the government to do an
interdisciplinary research project to promote modern languages in the United Kingdom and
reach the general public and demonstrate the value of languages across a range of fields. In
Cambridge there has been a very successful museum for science which is underpinned by
Cambridge research but with lots of fun activities for children and families. A first step will be
to do something similar for languages, renting some shop space on high streets around the


                                                109
United Kingdom and having a 'pop-up' museum. If this is successful, then the pop-up museum
could become the basis of a permanent collection.

Shanghai Language Museum, Shanghai, China
Linguistics at Shanghai International Studies University work on a plan for a language
museum.

Virtual Museum of Langage, Oxford, England
In November 2015, Martin Wynne, a digital research specialist at the University of Oxford
wrote about a pilot project for a new virtual museum “The collections of the virtual museum
would start by creating exhibits which draw together existing materials, and then be built up
over time with a series of new online exhibits created by guest curators. Exhibits could feature
digital images of artefacts in museums, opportunities for exploring language resources online,
interactive language games, podcasts and blogs about research in the University.”

World Center for Hebrew, Fishon LeZion, Israel
In the news in 2013: Near Tel Aviv, The World Center for Hebrew will be built at the city of
Rishon LeZion, thought to be the first where the entire curriculum was taught in Hebrew. The
museum intends to tell the history of the language and to make it accessible to the wider public,
including linking with universities around the world where Hebrew is taught.




                                               110
Museums closed

Brüder Grimm-Museum, Kassel, Germany (1959–2014)
The museum opened in 1959 in a house that the Grimm brothers visited on several occasions. It
was closed in 2014, leaving the arena for the new museum Grimmwelt (2015).

Schriftmuseum J.A. Dortmond, Anmsterdam, Netherlands (1976–2008)
This script and writing museum was opened in 1976 and closed and dismantled in 2008. The
collection is maintained at the Special Collections department of the University of Amsterdam.

Museum Scryption, Tilburg, Netherlands (1988–2011)
Museum Scryption for written communication was opened in 1988. After 22 years, the museum
was closed in 2011 because the municipality of Tilburg cut its subsidy.

Musée des Lettres et Manuscrits, Paris, France (2004–2014)
Musée des lettres et manuscrits de Bruxelles, Belgium (2011–2015)
Buth museums were owned by Gérard Lhéritier. The museum in Paris was opened in 2004. It
contained nearly 136,000 original manuscripts and letters, including the cease-fire order signed
by Dwight D. Eisenhower on May 7, 1945, letters from Napoleon and poems of Paul Éluard.
Nearly 250 documents were exhibited. It was closed in November 2014 and its contents
impounded after its owner and his company Aristophil came under formal investigation
allegedly running the museum as a pyramid scheme fraud. Foir the same reason, the museum
in Brussels was closed in January 2015.




                                               111
Projects halted

Cittá della Parola, several sites, Italy
Vittorio Bo presented the idea of City of the word in 2003, but it still seems to be a mere idea.
Several sites were mentioned – Venaria Reale (near Turin), Genoa or Milan. The range of
activities included Italy, extending then to Europe and other continents.

Danmarks Sprogmuseum, Århus, Denmark
In August 2006 the initiative was taken to build a language museum, a modern interactive
language exploration activity center, in Aarhus. The plan was to open the new museum when
Aarhus is Cultural capital of Europe in 2017. In lack of money, it stopped in February 2013.

Línguamon / Casa de les Liengües, Barcelona, Spain
This was meant to promote the world’s languages as a vehicle for communication, civilisation
and dialogue, and the rights of individuals and of linguistic communities. Due to financial and
administrative problems, the project was closed in May 2012.

Museum der deutschen Sprache, München, Germany
Die damalige Präsidentin des Goethe-Instituts, Jutta Limbach, plädierte in 2006 für die
Gründung eines Hauses der deutschen Sprache. Geschehen ist jedoch seither nichts.

Museum of maltese language, Vittoriosa, Malta
The government of Malta announced in April 2004 that a Musew Nazzjonali ta’ Istorija Sociali ta’
l-Ilsi was to be opened in Vittoriosa. No uipdated information has been available.

Museum of the Turkish Language in Karaman, Turkey
In 2009, reports of a projected museum inn Karaman, Anatolia in Turkey were lodged with the
Anatolian News Agency and published in various online outlets. The project was supported by
the Municipality of Karaman and would be sited in the Piri Reis Culture Centre, and comprise
both a museum and a library. Already in 2010, the national newspaper Cumhuriyet announced
that the museum would soon open. No further information can be found and today; it seems
that this ambitious project never came to fruition.

Museum of the Written Word, USA
It was the long-term goal of Cardome Academy Association to create a Center for the Written
Word at Cardome in Georgetown, Kentucky. It was meant to be an extensive literary
community devoted to the exploration and comprehension of language and text. By 2017, the it
was put away.

Orthografikum, Schleiz, Germany
Anfang 2009 versuchte der Geschichts- und Heimatverein in Schleiz ein „Haus zur Pflege der
deutschen Sprache“ aufzubauen, mit einer Ausstellung „Die Sprache Deutsch“. Diese
Ausstellung war 2009 im Deutschen Historischen Museum in Berlin zu sehen. Es hat
gescheitert.


                                                 112
                International
network of language museums




    113
114
Platform

Established in Milan, 3 July 2016



§ 1 Background
As an initiative from The Centre for Norwegian Language and Literature in October 2015, this
network was established in Milan July 3 2016, approved by the institutions signed below.

§ 2 Aims
The International network of language museums will promote the understanding of the role of
language in society, the values of multilingual societies and the importance of language
museums.
       The network will concentrate its work on these matters:
A.     Exchange of experiences, information, newsletters, etc.
B.     Help each other with questions about exhibitions, web sites, language issues etc.
C.     Discuss issues connected to our work with intangible cultural heritage
D.     Exchange of publications dealing with global language matters or issues in specific
       countries
E.     Develop possible international projects over some time

§ 3 Membership
Every museum is free to join the International network of language museums. By joining the
network, the institution agrees to this platform.
        Each member institution decides how many persons from the board and/or the staff that
will represent the institution in the network.

§ 4 Connection to ICOM
The network will cooperate with International Council of Museums (ICOM), International
Committee of Literary Museums (ICLM), and the national committees of ICOM in the
respective countries.

§ 5 Organization
The network will mainly work by e-mail and social media.
        All information is sent to the institutional e-mail address and to the persons
participating in the network on behalf of the institution.
        Every second year the network meets at one of the member institutions. All papers for
these meetings are sent to the members at least eight weeks in advance.
        By all decisions in meetings or otherwise, each member institution has one vote.

§ 6 Leadership
The biannual meeting elects a leader of the network and two other members of the network
board for two years.
       No institution or person may have such positions for more than eight years.



                                              115
§ 7 Transparency
All papers for the biannual meetings are public.

§ 8 Working language
English is the working language of the network.

§ 9 Logo
Each member institution indicates the membership in the network at its own website(s).

§ 10 Finances
Each member institution covers all its expenses by participating in this network.
An annual fee paid to the institution in charge of the network is to be decided at the 2018
meeting. For the years 2016 and 2017 no annual fee is paid.

§ 11 Changes
This platform may be changed by two third majority at the biannual meetings in the network.



Members 1 January 2018
Academy of the Hebrew Language, Jerusalem, Israel
Canadian Language Museum, Toronto, Canada
Centre for Norwegian Language and Literature, Ørsta, Norway
Dr Johnson’s House, London, England
Esperanto Museum of the Austrian National Library, Vienna, Austria
Eurotales, Rome, Italy
Initiative für ein Museum der Sprachen der Welt, Berlin, Tyskland
Institute of the Lithuanian Language, Vilnius, Lithuania
Language museum, Cambridge, England
Mundolingua, Paris, France
Museu da Língua Portuguesa, Sao Paolo, Brazil
Museum of Vuk and Dositej, Belgrade, Serbia
National Museum of Language, Greenbelt, USA
The English Project, Winchester, England



Board 2016–2018
Ottar Grepstad, Centre for Norwegian language and literature (chairman)
Mark Oremland, Mundolingua
Elaine Gold, Canadian Language Museum




                                               116
       Events and places
of memory and celebration




117
118
Years, days and weeks

1960        Year of Language, Italy
1975        Afrikaans Language Year, South Africa
1990        Year of the Hebrew Language, Israel
2001        European Year of Language, Europe
2005        The Year of Languages, USA
2007        National year of the Russian languge, Russia
2008        UN International Year of Languages
2013        The Year of Language / Språkåret 2013, Norway
2013–2014   Chinese-German Year of Language, Germany and China
2015        The year of Lithuania's regional dialects and ethnography, Lithuania
2016        The United Kingdom–Russia Year of Language and Literature
2019        UN International Year of Indigenous Languages



Jan 15      Chosŏn'gŭl Day, North Korea
Jan 25      Robert Burns Night, Scotland and Northern Ireland, 1802–
Feb 6       Day of the Sami people, Norway and Sweden, 1993-
Feb 13      World Radio Day, 2011-–
Feb 21      Language Movement Day, Bangladesh, 1963–
            International Mother Language Day, 2000-
Feb 24      Day of the Sweden Fins
Mar 1–17    Irish Gaelic Language Week, to weeks celebration before St. Patrick’s Day on
            March 17, 1903–
Mar 11–17   Croatian Language Week, 1991–
Mar 12      Republic of Jamtland Day, Sweden, with Jamska Language, 1963-
Mar 13      Native Language Day, Estonia
            National Language Day, Latvia
Mar 16      Kven Peoples’ Day, Norway and Sweden, 2014–
Mar 20      UN French Language Day, 1998–
            International French Language Day, 2010–
Mar 21      World Poetry Day, 2000–
Mar 25      Tolkien Reading day, 2003–
Mar 31      Indigenous Day, Canada, 1989–
Apr 8       International Romani Day, 1972–
Apr 9       Day of the Finnish Language
Apr 14      Georgian Language Day, 1990–
Apr 15      National American Sign Language Day, 2014–
Apr 16      Erzya Language Day, 1993–
Apr 20      UN Chinese Language Day, 2010-
Apr 23      World Book and Copyright Day, 1996–
            UN English Language Day, 2010–
May 3       World Press Freedom Day, 1993–
May 5       Lusophone Culture Day, 2005–

                                           119
May 17      Galician Literature Day, 1963–
May 24      Slavonic Literature Day, Bulgaria, 1863–
Jun 6       UN Russian Language Day, 2010–
Jun 16      Bloomsday in Dublin, 1954–
Jun 21      National Aboriginal Day, Canada, 1996–
            International Pashto Day, 2012–
Jul 29      National Thai Language Day, Thailand, 1999–
Aug         National Eisteddfod of Wales, the first week of August, 1861–
Aug         Linggo ng Wika, national language week, Philippines, first week in August,
            1954–
Aug 9       International Day of the World's Indigenous Peoples, 1994–
Aug 25      Guaraní Language Day, Paraguay, 1967–
Aug 20      Manipuri Language Day, 1992–
Aug 31      National Language Day, Moldova, 1989–
Sep         Belarusian Written Language Day, first Sunday in September, 1994–
Sep 8       International Literacy Day, 1966–
Sep 14      Maori Language Day, 1972–
            Maori Language Week, New Zealand, 1975–
Sep 23      Kyrgyz Language Day, 1989–
Sep 26      European Day of Languages, 2002–
            German Language Day, 2001–
Sep 30      International Translation Day, 1953–
Sep         International Day of Sign Languages, last Sunday in September, 1958–
Oct 5       Tajik Language Day, Tajikistan, 2009–
Oct 9       Ukrainian Language and Literature Day, 1997–
            Hangeul Day, South Korea, 1926–
Oct         Indigenous Peoples' Day in USA, second Monday in October, 1992–
Oct 12      UN Spanish Language Day, 2010–
Oct 13      International Plain Language Day, 2012–
            English Language Day, 2009–
Oct 14–20   World week of Italian Language, 2001–
Oct 21      Uzbek Language Day, 1989–
Oct 28      National Language Day, Indonesia, 1987–
Oct         International Creole Day, Last Sunday, 1984–
Nov 1       National Author’s Day, USA, 1949–
Nov 6       Finnish Swedish Heritage Day, 1908–
Nov 16      Icelandic Language Day, 1995–
Nov 21      World Television Day, 1997
Nov         Gaelic Language Day, Scotland, 2012–
Dec 3       International Day of the Basque Language, 1947–
Dec 7       Language Politics Day, Sweden, 2007–
Dec 18      UN Arabic Language Day, 2012–




                                           120
A selection of language festivals

March       International Languages Festival, England (2010)
            University of Sheffield

Mar / Apr   Tamil Language Festival, Indonesia (2000)
            Singapore, Indonesia
            Annually, promoting the Tamil language amongst Singapore Indians.
            http://tamil.org.sg tamillanguagecouncil@moe.gov.sg

Mar/Apr     Little Karoo National Arts Festival, South Africa (1994)
            Karoo, Oudtshoorn
            Annual Afrikaans language arts festival, the largest arts festival in South Africa.
            http://kknk.co.za/ info@kknk.co.za

April       Native American Language and Culture Festival, USA
            Albuquerque, New Mexico, UISA
            Annual, to foster, encourage, and promote bilingualism.
            http://nmabe.net/about/ nmabe@suddenlink.net

May         Japanese Language Festival, Malaysia (2007)
            Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
            Annually, for Japanese language learners on Japanese culture and language
            http://jlfest.weebly.com/ jlsm.enquiries@gmail.com

May/June    Beijing Foreign Language Festival, China (2002)
            Beijing, China
            Annually, uniting the multilingual citizens of Beijing
            www.bjenglish.com.cn (Chinese)

May/June    Sydney Language Festival, Australia (2012)
            Sydney, Australia
            The purpose is to show the great linguistic diversity of languages in existence.
            http://sydneylanguagefestival.org.au/

June        The Arabic Language Festival, Lebanon
            Beirut, Lebanon
            Celebrating the Arabic language, culture and history.
            arabiclanguagefestival.com/ (Arabic) contact@vazola.com

June        Norwegian Festival of Language and Arts, Norway (1992)
            Ørsta and Volda, Norway
            Annual celebration of Norwegian Nynorsk and dialects
            www.festspela.no admin@aasentunet.no


                                             121
June        Tafwyl Festival, Wales (2006)
            Cardiff, Wales
            Annual, weeklong celebration of the use of the Welsh language.
            http://www.tafwyl.org/en llinoswilliams@mentercaerdydd.org

July        Riddu Riddu, Norway (1991)
            Kåfjord, Norway
            The major festival for Sami cultural tradition and language in Norway.
            http://riddu.no/en riddu@riddu.no

August      Waanyi Language Festival, Australia
            Old Doomadgee, Queensland
            Get together and celebrate your knowledge of the Waanyi Language.
            community@waanyi.org.au

August      Toowoomba Languages and Cultures Festival, Australia
            Old Toowoomba, Queensland
            Annual celebration of the diversity and languages and cultures.
            www.tims.org.au/TLC-Festival info@tims.org.au

August      Turkish Language Festival (2015)
            Istanbul, Turkey
            Organized by Yunus Emre Institute in connection with Turkish Summer School

September   CHS Language Festival, South Africa (2003)
            College of Human Sciences (CHS), Mbombela, South Africa
            Celebrating the linguistic and cultural diversity and heritage of South Africa.
            www.unisa.ac.za/chs/news/index.php/2012/11/chs-annual-language-festival-
            celebrating-diversity-through-language-and-culture/

Sep         Waverley Language Festival, Australia (2016)
            Waverley, Australia
            Celebrates language diversity and raise awareness about endangered languages.
            www.languagefestival.org/waverley/

Sep/Oct     IMRAM – Irish Language Literature Festival, Ireland (2004)
            Dublin, Ireland
            Annually, within a modern, energetic and multicultural framework.
            http://imram.ie/ liamog62@mac.com

October     Festspiel der Deutschen Sprache, Germany (2006)
            Bad Lauchstädt, Sachsen-Anhalt, Germany
            Kontemplativ über die deutsche Sprache als schützenswerte Kulturleistung.
            www.goethe-theater.com/festspiel/ info@goethe-theater.com

Oct/Nov     Cooish festival, England (early 1990’s)
            Isle of Man, England

                                            122
           Annual celebration of Manx language, culture and heritage.
           www.learnmanx.com cooish@manx.net

Oct/Nov    National Language Festival, United Kingdom (2013)
           London and several places
           Celebrating the diverse cultural variety in UK and benefits of language learning.
           www.theguardian.com/language-festival

November   Indian Languages Festival (2011)
           New Delhi, India
           Annual promotion of collaboration within and among Indian languages and
           cultures, with exhibitions
           http://ilfsamanvay.org/

Various    Lingvo Festivalo / Festival of language, several countries (1995)
           http://lingvafestivalo.org/node/1
           Festivals for mutual understanding, held by Esperanto organizations

Various    International festival of language and culture (2003)
           Annual showcase for the diversity of linguistic talents, in different cities.
           http://www.intflc.org/




                                            123
Language monuments by country

In general, statues of persons are not included.

Australia
Ashfield Park, Sydney: Mother Language Monument, in honour of the Shaheed Minar (2006)

Bangladesh
Dhaka: Shaheed Minar / Language Martyrs (1963, rebuilt 1972)

Belarus
Polatsk: Monument for the Belarusian Letter 〈ў〉 (2003)

Canada
Scarborough, Ontario: Language Monument (2013)
Surrey, British Colombia: Lingua Aqua Mother Language Monument
Toronto, Ontario: International Mother Language Day Monument
Winnipeg, Manitoba: Shaheed Minar / Language Martyrs (replica)

England
Birmingham: International Mother Language Monument
Tower Hamlets, London: Shaheed Minar / Language Martyrs (replica)
Westwood, Oldham, Manchester: Shaheed Minar / Language Martyrs (replica)

Estonia
Kadrina: Emakeel Monument / Monment for the Estonian language (1994)

Mali
Bamako: Obélisque des idéogrammes (2000)

Norway
Ørsta: Obelisk in honour of Ivar Aasen (1898)

Romania
Chisinau: Romanian language monument (2014)

Russia
Belgorod: Monument of the Russian Language (2007)
Kitai Gorod, Moscow: Statue of Sts Cyril and Methodius Klykov (1992)

South Africa
Burgersdorp, Eastern Cape: Dutch Language Monument (1893)
East London, Eastern Cape: Afrikaans Language Monument (1975)
Kroonstad, Free State: Afrikaans Language Monument (1960)
Petrus Steyn, Free State: Afrikaans Language Monument (1975)

                                                124
Reddersburg, Free State: Afrikaans Language Monument (1975)
Reitz, Free State: Afrikaans Language and History Monument (1975)
Ventersburg, Free State: Afrikaans Language Monument (1975)
Welkom, Free State: Afrikaans Language Monument (1960)
Johannesburg, Gauteng: Afrikaans Language Monument (1975)
Louis Trichardt, Limpopo: Afrikaans Language Monument (1975)
Belfast, Mpumalanga: Afrikaans Language Monument (1975)
Ermelo, Mpumalanga: Afrikaans Language Monument (1975)
Ohrigstad, Mpumalanga: Afrikaans Language Monument (1975)
Delareyville, Noordwes: Afrikaans language and history monument (1975)
Lichtenburg, Noordwes: Afrikaans Language Monument (1975)
Paarl, Western Cape: Afrikaans Language Monument (1975)
Touws River, Western Cape: Afrikaans Language Monument (1976)
Worcester, Western Cape: Afrikaans Language Monument (1975)

Ukraine
Odessa: Ludvic Zamenhof




                                           125
126
      Indexes




127
128
Museums by country

Argentina
Museo de la Lengua (2012), Los Polvorines
Museo del Libro y de la Lengua (2011), Buenos Aires

Australia
Sydney Museum of Words (2013), Sydney
Yugambeh Museum (1995), Beenleigh

Austria
Esperanto Museum of the Austrian National Library (1927), Vienna

Bangladesh
Language Movement Museum (2010), Dhaka

Brazil
Museu da Língua Portuguesa (2006), Sao Paolo

Bulgaria
House Museum of Neofit Rilski (1981), Bansko

Canada
Canadian Language Museum (2011), Toronto
Baile nan Gàidheal / Highland Village (1962), Iona

China
China Book Culture Exhibition Hall (2008), Beijing
National Museum of Chinese Writing (2009), Anyang
Esperanto Museum (2013), Zaochuang
Nüshu Museum (2004), Jiangyong

Croatia
Ljudevit Gaj Museum (1966), Krapina

Czech Republic
Esperanto Museum (2008), Svitavy

England
Dr. Johnson’s House (1911), London
Museum of Writing (1999), London
The Word (2016), South Shields

France
Mundolingua (2013), Paris
Musée Champollion (2007), Figeac
Musée national de l’espéranto de Gray (1977), Gray




                                                     129
Germany
Daniel Sanders Haus (2011), Neustrelitz
Deutsches Buch- und Schriftmuseum (1884), Leipzig
Erlebniswelt Deutsche Sprache (2013), Köthen
Grimmwelt (2015), Kassel
Gutenberg Museum (1901), Mainz
Klingspor-Museum Offenbach (1953), Offenbach am Main
Konrad-Duden-Museum (1999), Bad Hersfeld
Museum der Sprachen der Welt (2013), Berlin
Museum für Kommunikation (1898), Berlin
SprachRaum (2010), Buchen
wortreich (2011), Bad Hersfeld

Hungary
Hungarian Language Museum (2008), Szephalom

Ireland
Great Blasket Centre (1993), Blasket Island

Italy
Dante Alighieri Society (2011), Rome
Museo del Dialetto dell'Alto Lario Occidentale (2007), Dosso del Liro
Museo della Lingua Greco-Calabra “Gerhard Rohlfs” (2016), Bova
Sòn de Lenga Museum (1999), Dronero
Museum Ladin Ćiastel de Tor (2001), St. Martin in Thurn

Kazakhstan
Yazi Tarihi Müzesi (2003), Astana

Korea
National Hangeul Museum (2014), Seoul

Lithuania
Museum of the Lithuanian language (2006), Vilnius

Netherlands
Taalmuseum (2016), Leiden

Northern Ireland
Cultúrlann McAdam Ó Fiaich (1991), Belfast

Norway
Ivar Aasen Centre (1898), Ørsta

Paraguay
Ateneo de Lengua y Cultura Guaraní (1985), Fernando de la Mora
Museo de la Tierra Guaraní (1978), Hernandarias

Serbia
Museum of Vuk and Dositej (1949), Belgrade



                                                   130
Slovakia
Ján Kollár Museum (1983), Mošovce
Ľudovít Štúr Museum (1965), Modra
Native House of Ľudovít Štúr and Alexander Dubček (1965), Uhrovec

Slovenia
Primož Trubar House (1986), Velike Lašče

South Africa
Afrikaans Language Museum and Monument (1975), Paarl

Spain
Museo de Esperanto de Subirats (1968), Subirats
Museum of the Basque language (2004), Bilbao
Verbum – Casa das Palabras (2003), Vigo

Switzerland
Museum für Kommunikation (1907), Bern
Sprachpanorama (2017), Laufenberg

Ukraine
Linguistic Educational Museum (1992), Kyiv

USA
Alutiiq Museum (1995), Kodiak
Basque Museum and Cultural Center (1985), Boise
JAARS Museum of the Alphabet (1961), Waxhaw
National Museum of Language (2008), Greenbelt
Noah Webster House (1966), West Hartford




                                                  131
Museums by year

Deutsches Buch- und Schriftmuseum              1884  Leipzig         Germany
Museum für Kommunikation                       1898  Berlin          Germany
Ivar Aasen Centre                              1898  Ørsta           Norway
Gutenberg Museum                               1901  Mainz           Germany
Museum für Kommunikation                       1907  Bern            Switzerland
Dr. Johnson’s House                            1911  London          England
Esperanto Museum of the Austrian National Library 1927 Vienna        Austria
Museum of Vuk and Dositej                      1949  Belgrade        Serbia
Klingspor-Museum Offenbach                     1953  Offenbach am Main Germany
JAARS Museum of the Alphabet                   1961  Waxhaw          USA
Baile nan Gàidheal / Highland Village          1962  Iona            Canada
Ľudovít Štúr Museum                            1965  Modra           Slovakia
Native House of Ľ. Štúr and A. Dubček          1965  Uhrovec         Slovakia
Ljudevit Gaj Museum                            1966  Krapina         Croatia
Noah Webster House                             1966  West Hartford USA
Museo de Esperanto de Subirats                 1968  Subirats        Spain
Afrikaans Language Museum and Monument 1975          Paarl           South Africa
Musée national de l’espéranto de Gray          1977  Gray            France
Museo de la Tierra Guaraní                     1978  Hernandarias Paraguay
House Museum of Neofit Rilski                  1981  Bansko          Bulgaria
Ján Kollár Museum                              1983  Mošovce         Slovakia
Ateneo de Lengua y Cultura Guaraní             1985  Fernando de la Mora Paraguay
Basque Museum and Cultural Center              1985  Boise           USA
Primož Trubar House                            1986  Velike Lašče    Slovenia
Language Movement Museum                       1989  Dhaka           Bangladesh
Cultúrlann McAdam Ó Fiaich                     1991  Belfast         Northern Ireland
Linguistic Educational Museum                  1992  Kyiv            Ukraine
Great Blasket Centre                           1993  Blasket Island Ireland
Alutiiq Museum                                 1995  Kodiak          USA
Yugambeh Museum                                1995  Beenleigh       Australia
Konrad-Duden-Museum                            1999  Bad Hersfeld Germany
Sòn de Lenga Museum                            1999  Dronero         Italy
Museum of Writing                              1999  London          England
Museum Ladin Ćiastel de Tor                    2001  St. Martin in Thurn Italy
Verbum – Casa das Palabras                     2003  Vigo            Spain
Yazi Tarihi Müzesi                             2003  Astana          Kazakhstan
Museum of the Basque language                  2004  Bilbao          Spain
Nüshu Museum                                   2004  Jiangyong       China
Museu da Língua Portuguesa                     2006  Sao Paolo       Brazil
Museum of the Lithuanian language              2006  Vilnius         Lithuania
Musée Champollion                              2007  Figeac          France
Museo del Dialetto dell'Alto Lario Occidentale 2007  Dosso del Liro Italy
China Book Culture Exhibition Hall             2008  Beijing         China
Esperanto Museum                               2008  Svitavy         Czhch Republic
Hungarian Language Museum                      2008  Szephalom       Hungary
National Museum of Language                    2008  Greenbelt       USA
National Museum of Chinese Writing             2009  Anyang          China


                                                132
                   SprachRaum                         2010    Buchen        Germany
                   Daniel Sanders Haus                2011    Neustrelitz   Germany
                   Dante Alighieri Society            2011    Florence      Italy
                   Museo del Libro y de la Lengua     2011    Buenos Aires  Argentina
                   wortreich                          2011    Bad Hersfeld  Germany
                   Canadian Language Museum           2011    Toronto       Canada
                   Museo de la Lengua                 2012    Los Polvorines Argentina
                   Erlebniswelt Deutsche Sprache      2013    Köthen        Germany
                   Esperanto Museum                   2013    Zaozhuang     China
                   Mundolingua                        2013    Paris         France
                   Museum der Sprachen der Welt       2013    Berlin        Germany
                   Sydney Museum of Words             2013    Sydney        Australia
                   National Hangeul Museum            2014    Seoul         Korea
                   Grimmwelt                          2015    Kassel        Germany
                   Museo della Lingua Greco-Calabra   2016    Bova          Italy
                   Taal Museum                        2016    Leiden        Netherlands
                   The Word                           2016    South Shields England
                   Sprachpanorama                     2017    Laufenberg    Switzerland




                                                        133




omslag language museum.indd 3                                                             08.03.2018 16:11:26
                                Language museums
                                   of the world
                       65 museums in 31 countries on five continents
                      15 digital museums, 39 websites, 35 monuments
                      104 events and places of memory and celebration

                      Anyang China Astana Kazakhstan Bad Hersfeld Germany Bansko
                     Bulgaria Beenleigh Australia Beijing China Belfast Northern Ireland
                      Belgrade Serbia Berlin Germany Bern Switzerland Blasket Island
                        Ireland Boise USA Bova Italy Braunschweig Germany Buchen
                     Germany Buenos Aires Argentina Dhaka Bangladesh Dosso del Liro
                       Italy Dronero Italy Fernando de la Mora Paraguay Figeac France
                      Florence Italy Gray France Geenbelt USA Hangyong China Iona
                        Canada Hernandarias Paraguay Kassel Germany Kyiv Ukraine
                    Krapina Croatia Laufenberg Switzerland Leiden Netherlands Leipzig
                    Germany London England Los Polvorines Argentina Mainz Germany
                     Modra Slovakia Mošovce Slovakia Neustrelitz Germany Offenbach
                     am Main Germany Paarl South Africa Paris France Rome Italy Sao
                    Paolo Brazil Seoul Korea South Shields England St. Martin in Thurn
                         Italy Subirats Spain Svitavy Czech Republic Sydney Australia
                    Szephalom Hungary Toronto Canada Uhrovec Slovakia Velike Lašče
                    Slovenia Vienna Austria Vigo Spain Vilnius Lithuania Waxhaw USA
                              West Hartford USA Zaozhuang China Ørsta Norway


                   Language is a city to the building of which every human being brought
                   a stone.
                                                                     Ralph Waldo Emerson, 1863

                    ISBN 978-82-92602-25-6

                                                       134




omslag language museum.indd 4                                                               08.03.2018 16:11:26
